Looking down from two miles above the surface of the Earth it's impossible not to be impressed by the sheer grandeur and splendour and power of the natural world. Ten years ago, in a television series called Planet Earth, we revealed many of those wonders, but today, much has changed. We can now show life on our planet in entirely new ways. Bring you closer to animals than ever before. And reveal new wildlife dramas for the very first time. But that's not all. Our planet has changed too. Never have those wildernesses been as fragile and as precious as they are today. At this crucial time for the natural world, we will journey to every corner of the globe to explore the greatest treasures of our living planet and reveal the extreme lengths animals go to to survive. Finally, we will explore our cities to see how life is adapting to the newest habitat on Earth. This is Planet Earth II. There are hundreds of thousands of islands, each one a world in miniature, a microcosm of our living planet. The struggles to survive on these remote lands reflect the challenges faced by all life on Earth. The tiny island of Escudo off the coast of Panama. Home to the pygmy three-toed sloth. This is a male and life here suits him well. Mangroves provide all the leaves he can eat and there are no predators to worry him. Island life may seem idyllic but it comes at a price. There are only a few hundred pygmy sloths in existence. And he needs a mate. (SCREECHING) That's an enticing call from a female. Somewhere out there. And this, for a sloth, is a quick reaction. (FEMALE SCREECHES AGAIN) The problem is, there's deep water between them. So what should any red-blooded sloth do? Swim, of course. Could this be her? He does his best to put on a turn of speed. But she's not the one. She already has a baby and she won't mate again until it leaves her in about six months' time. Even life on a paradise island can have its limitations. (MORE SCREECHING) But at least she can't be far away. The world's entire population of pygmy sloths is isolated on a speck of land no bigger than New York's Central Park. The size of an island has a huge influence on the fate of those cast away there. The island of Komodo in Indonesia. Home to dragons. Ten feet long and weighing an impressive 150 lbs, these are the largest living lizards on the planet. It's unusual to find large predators on islands. Yet, for four million years, the Komodo dragon has dominated here. It might seem there wouldn't be enough food to support such giants on this relatively small island. But reptiles, being cold-blooded, need only about a tenth of the food a carnivorous mammal would. A single meal will last a dragon a month. There are so successful that their only serious competition comes from others of their own kind. And there are some 2,000 of them here. This giant, however, isn't looking for food... he's looking for a mate. Female dragons come into season only once a year. She's receptive. So far, so good. But he's strayed into someone else's patch. Another huge male thinks he is the king here. Space being limited on islands, dragon territories overlap and that creates continual conflict. In dragon society, size is everything. But if rivals are closely matched, the outcome can be uncertain. Muscular tails strike with the power of sledgehammers. And their serrated teeth are as sharp as steak knives. Each tries to topple his opponent. Defeated. Only the most powerful dragons win the right to mate. The limited food and space on small islands can often lead to intense competition. But some islands are immense. More like miniature continents. And these provide opportunities for life to experiment and evolve. Madagascar is one of the biggest islands and also one of the oldest, having split away from Africa over 120 million years ago. With time and isolation, its animals have adapted to take advantage of every available niche. The island now has some most found nowhere else on Earth. These are not monkeys, but lemurs. From a single ancestor, about The largest, the indri, seldom comes down from the branches. The much smaller ringtails wander in troops across the forest floor searching for food. And tiny bamboo lemurs eat nothing except bamboo. With few competitors, lemurs have been free to colonise almost every environment on the island. Even the most extreme. This baby sifaka has a hard life ahead of it. He's been born in the most arid and hostile corner of Madagascar's vast landscape. If he is to survive here, he has much to learn. The spiny forest is like a desert. It rarely rains, so water and food is very hard to find. Moving from tree to tree is a perilous business. Here, nearly all the plants are covered with ferocious spines. His mother searches the tree tops for the youngest leaves. They provide the only food and water to sustain the family. At three months old, the youngster is starting to explore. All too soon he will have to fend for himself up here. But it's altogether easier to stay on mother's back. If he can master the strange ways of this forest he will have a little corner of Madagascar to himself. Island life encourages animals to do things differently. And on some islands that is essential. There are islands still forming today built by volcanoes. Some erupt explosively. Others pour out rivers of molten rock. Lava. In the last 50 years, ten new volcanic islands have been formed. Newly created and often remote, they're hard for colonists to reach. Even those that do find these are tough places to survive. This is Fernandina, one of the Galapagos Islands in the Pacific. Young and still volcanically active, it's a desolate place. The surrounding sea, however, is particularly rich with life. And the frontier between these two very different worlds is the home of one of the strangest of reptiles. Seagoing iguanas. They are vegetarians, but since there's little food for them on the land, marine iguanas graze on the sea floor. A big male like this one can dive to 30 metres and hold his breath for half an hour. There are more than 7,000 individuals on Fernandina alone. And by bringing nutrients from the sea to the land, the iguanas help other animals to survive here, too. Crabs feed on dead skin on the iguana's back and, in turn, provide a welcome exfoliation service. While smaller lizards prey on the flies that pester the colony. But not all the relationships on this island are so harmonious. Marine iguanas lay their eggs in sand. In June, when the hatchlings emerge, they are vulnerable. They must join the adults at the edge of the sea. But the journey will be a dangerous one. Racer snakes. The snakes miss their chance. But more babies are hatching. And now the snakes are on the alert. This is the best feeding opportunity they will get all year. On flat ground, a baby iguana can outrun a racer snake. But others are waiting in ambush. Another hatchling has its first glimpse of a dangerous world. A snake's eyes aren't very good, but they can detect movement. So if the hatchling keeps its nerve, it may just avoid detection. A near miraculous escape. The lucky survivors can begin learning the unique way of life demanded by this hostile island. Although marine iguanas are expert swimmers, they can't cross open oceans. But even the stormiest waters are no barrier for birds. Gale force winds and cold temperatures make the sub-Antarctic islands off New Zealand particularly unwelcoming in winter. But, when the brief summer comes, temperatures rise and winds slacken. It's now that visitors arrive. All here to breed before winter returns. There's the Snares penguins. Shearwaters come, too. This is an excellent place for them to dig their nesting burrows, for no predators have managed to get here. Soon the island is crowded with birds. Every one of them eager to make the most of the short breeding season. But not everyone has a partner. A male Buller's albatross waits for his mate. Each year they spend six months apart, travelling the ocean. They reunite here to breed. But this year, she's late. No, that's not her. The other birds come and go. The clock is ticking. If she doesn't appear soon, it could be too late for them to breed successfully. Every morning the shearwaters fly off to collect food for their young. Everybody else seems to be getting on with it. The shearwaters' return marks another lost day. There are three million birds on the island, but only one matters to him. Could this be her? At last. At first, he's a little coy. But not for long. They greet each other with the special dance they've perfected over many years. There is much to do if they're to raise a chick before winter returns. But when you have been apart for six months, some things can't be rushed. Islands in warm tropical waters don't experience seasonal extremes. The Seychelles, lying off the coast of East Africa, provide a sanctuary for sea birds all the year round. Fairy terns are permanent residents. They take a fairly relaxed view about what constitutes a nest. A bare branch is quite enough. Climbing onto it to incubate has to be done with care. Once a year, the noddies arrive. They do make nests, and pisonia trees provide their young with a rather less precarious start in life. Nesting on this island looks idyllic. But behind the beauty, there's a sinister side. The Seychelles fody makes quick work of an unattended egg. She knows something's not quite right, but her drive to incubate is strong. The noddies too have a problem. As their chicks grow, so the pisonia trees develop seeds that are sticky and equipped with hooks. By the time the young noddies leave, they carry these hitchhiking seeds away to other islands. But sometimes the pisonia trees are too successful. If a fledgling, testing out its wings, drops to the ground, it can get covered with the seeds. Entangled and weighed down, if it can't free itself, the youngster will starve. The pisonia may have failed to disperse these seeds but it will soon have fertiliser for its roots. This is why some people call the pisonia the "bird catcher tree". The fairy tern laid another egg, and now she has a tiny chick to feed. This chick is lucky. By the time it fledges, the pisonia seeds will have dispersed, and the danger they brought will be gone. Even the most idyllic-looking of islands presents challenges for the animals living there. But the greatest threat they face is change. Christmas Island in the Indian Ocean. For millions of years, this remote speck of land has been ruled by crabs. Their ancestors came from the sea, but most have now adopted a land-based existence. Given there are so many of them, they get on relatively harmoniously. They're the gardeners and caretakers of a tiny crab utopia. Once a year, they must all return to the sea to breed, and the march of the red crabs is one of the greatest natural spectacles on earth. There are 50 million of them. It's an event that has brought the island worldwide fame. But in recent years, millions of red crabs haven't managed to reach the sea. An invader has occupied this island. Yellow crazy ants. They escaped from visiting ships and with no predators to control them, they have now created vast super colonies in the forest. When migrating red crabs march into their territory, the ants attack. Squirting acid into the crabs' eyes and mouths. The crabs have no defence. Blinded and confused they're doomed. Humans brought these ant invaders here, and now humans are having to control them. Isolated communities may evolve from millions of years in relative peace. But, when new challenges arrive, they can struggle to cope. Of all the species that have become extinct in recent years, around 80% have been islanders. Our impact on the Earth is greater today than ever before. Yet some islands are so remote that few humans have even set foot on them. Zavodovski Island is one. It lies in the great Southern Ocean. It's not only surrounded by the stormiest of seas, it is itself an active volcano. It's the last place on Earth you would choose to live. Unless you're a chinstrap penguin. There is plenty of food in these waters, but to exploit it, the penguins have to risk their lives. Life here is dangerous in the extreme. (PENGUINS CHATTER) But there are some benefits from living on a volcano. Its warmth melts the snow early in the year. And, by January, the Antarctic's mid-summer, the island is covered in chicks. Parents take turns at guarding them until they're large enough to be left alone. This mother's chicks are hungry, but she has no food left to give them. Their survival depends on their father returning with the next meal. But some don't make it. Skuas harass the colony, hoping to snatch a chick. She can't risk leaving them. Everything will be fine, as long as their father comes back soon. He's been fishing 50 miles offshore, but now he's not far away. For him, however, and for all the other parents here, the worst of the journey is still to come. Tiny claws help him to get whatever grip he can on the rough lava. For these commuters, it's rush hour. Some have had a really bad day. The father now has a two-mile walk to the nest, and a stomach loaded with food doesn't help. This is the largest penguin colony in the world. But as he makes the same journey every other day, he should be able to do it with his eyes closed. It's true that there can be safety in numbers, but numbers can also be something of a problem when you're trying to find your own nest. The mother is still waiting. Her chicks are now desperate. (THEY CHEEP) In the midst of all this deafening chorus, he can recognise her particular cry. At last. Both chicks will get a meal. With a head bob of acknowledgement, their mother now leaves. It's her turn to do the feeding run. This formidable commute is the price these penguins pay for sanctuary. A strange vision of paradise to us, perhaps, but, for one and a half million penguins, this island has it all. Islands may seem remote and insignificant, but they are home to some of the most precious wildlife on Earth. The expedition to film on the island of Zavodovski was the most intrepid shoot of the series. To ensure its success, the team have called in Antarctic expert Jerome Poncet, one of the few people to have set foot on the island. This whole region of Antarctica is rarely visited. And this is the planet's roughest ocean. After seven long days and nights at sea, they get their first glimpse of the final destination. It's actually quite surreal after a whole year, trying to put the expedition together. And then today we wake up, and there's the volcano. That's Zavodovski. The explorers who discovered this place spoke of the stench of sulphurous gases, treacherous waters, and astonishing numbers of penguins. It seems not much has changed. Jerome's been round the whole place, and there literally is only one safe area to get on, and he's telling us it's that rock face over there. The team must take everything they need to survive. There are the penguins! Though the boat'll stay nearby, they will need to be self-sufficient. But that means taking a tonne of equipment up this cliff. Just get to that lot to help. Many flippers make light work. They work all day getting the gear ashore. But the fact there are so many penguins on the island doesn't make it easy. The hardest thing for us has been finding a pathway through, because there's absolutely penguins everywhere you look. Finally, it's time to make camp. They choose a sheltered place that won't disturb the locals. But since most of the penguins won't have seen a human being before, they seem keen to pop over and visit. Hello. Nosy neighbours. The team set off to start documenting the daily lives of the penguins, and what they find is astonishing. As soon as you walk over that ridge, you sort of get a tingly feeling, because I've never seen that many animals in one spot. It's mind-blowing. It's like Glastonbury Festival. The whole landscape is full of little black and white penguins waddling around. This is penguin paradise, and that's what we're trying to show. A promising start. But here, fortunes can change quickly. Every season within ten minutes. As the snow melts, it creates an unforeseen problem. We purposely chose this campsite because it was a place where the penguins didn't seem to go. I think we've realised why the penguins don't nest here. It's because of the spray and because of some run-off, so we are literally in a bit of a bog. And it's not just mud. A couple of these guys, as they wander down to do a spot of fishing, they tend to use my tent as a little poop spot. You kind of get used to it at night, just hearing a constant splat on top of the tent. But, as you can see, all of the kit, I'm afraid that's getting splat on as well. And, when the wind changes, it brings a noxious reminder that they're camping on an active volcano. It's the first time we've smelt sulphur, which is welcome relief from smelling penguins. It's smoking away. I think if they start running for the sea, we're going to be calling Jerome pretty quick for the boat. Each day filming on Zavodovski seems to present a new challenge. Next, a huge storm hits the island. Only now do the team realise just how tough life can be for the penguins. After witnessing the struggles, the penguins must endure, the team now face the same problem. Getting off the island. With another storm coming in, they decide to take their chance. Jerome has seconds to get in and out between the waves. Or the Zodiac could tip leaving them all stranded. Hurray, that's the first box off the island. What took a day to get ashore must be off in minutes. And the swell is getting bigger. Their window of opportunity is closing. Look at this swell now, watch out, watch out! The equipment's off, but now the team has to follow. Luckily it didn't come to that. Safely aboard, they leave with an unforgettable experience of how hard life is on an island at the edge of the world. Next time, we ascend into the planet's highest peaks to discover a spectacular but hostile world, where only the toughest animals can endure. This is life on the roof of the world. Mountains. There are only a dozen peaks in the world that rise five miles high. All of them are here, in the Himalayas. Lethally cold, scoured by gales and blizzards, these mountains are among the most hostile places on Earth. Yet, a few special animals manage to live here. Snow leopards. Like all creatures of the high mountains, they have had to adapt both their body and their behaviour in order to survive. Life at extreme altitude has shaped some of the toughest animals on the planet. (LEOPARD ROARS) The sunbaked mountains of the Arabian Peninsula. They may only be a fraction of the height of the Himalayas, but they are still so dizzyingly steep that in many places it's almost impossible to get a foothold. Yet Nubian ibex have made this their home. (BIRD CALLS) The ibex choose the steepest cliffs to raise their young, in safety, beyond the reach of predators. But living in this sanctuary comes with a cost. These nursery slopes are so steep, there is almost no standing water up here. So to drink, an ibex family must descend into the valley 1,000 feet below. The mothers pick out the safest way down. With soft cloven hooves that grip better than any climbing shoe, they are the most accomplished mountaineers. But the newborn kids are still having to find their feet. This is their first descent. One mistake could make it their last. Following the adults, the kids finally reach the valley. But once on level ground, they're vulnerable. Red foxes lie in wait. At the first sign of danger, the young ibex instinctively run back to steeper ground. (KID BLEATS) But heading for this particular rocky outcrop could be a mistake. It's a 30-foot drop. The fox has them trapped... or so it seems. This is what ibex were born to do. Scattering makes it hard for the fox to pick a target. And it certainly can't follow them up here. All it can do is wait for one to slip and fall. But these youngsters are fast learners, and they're now almost as sure-footed as their parents. The fox will have to find its meal elsewhere. It's just not been a good day. Now, at last, the young ibex can drink. But they'll soon need to return to the safety of the sheer cliffs. Mastering precipitous terrain is always challenging, but there are more fundamental problems for life in the mountains. The Alps. Europe's highest peaks. It's winter, and food is desperately short. A golden eagle has to spend every daylight hour scanning the slopes for something, somewhere, to eat. Her seven-foot wingspan allows her to glide effortlessly for 100 miles in a single day. Her extraordinary eyes enable her to spot prey from two miles away. But she is not the only one who's looking for food. When she spots a chance, she must move fast. She can dive at 200 miles an hour. Only a peregrine is faster. During winter, even eagles rely almost entirely on carrion. It's a dead fox, and it could sustain her for days. Other scavengers must defer. The hungry crows soon regain their courage. They'll try any trick to steal a morsel. And they are annoyingly persistent. But this mob are the least of her worries. A bigger eagle takes control. But this kill is too important to give up. So she must fight. For the moment, she's won the carcass back. But a kill like this will attract every eagle for miles around. As ever, the strongest wins the lion's share. Unable to defend the carcass any longer, the first eagle must now continue its search. It may be many days before she feeds again. Only the most competitive will survive the perils of the mountain winter. (RUMBLING) An avalanche. 100,000 tonnes of snow travelling at 80 miles an hour, capable of smashing everything in its path. The mountains of North America are hit by thousands of avalanches every year. Yet one animal spends the whole winter slumbering within the snow on these avalanche-prone slopes. And when spring comes, they emerge. All across these mountains, grizzly bears make their winter dens 10,000 feet up in the deep snow of leeward slopes. And while they were half-asleep in the depths of winter, their young were born. Now these cubs are taking their first steps into the outside world. This mother is leading her three youngsters to a place where they can find food. (RUMBLING) They need to descend as quickly as possible. The debris from an avalanche is clear evidence that this slope is still dangerously unstable. This is not a place to dawdle. And they have another reason to keep moving. After five months in the den, these bears are very hungry. Bears that have hibernated throughout these peaks now all descend to the valleys, where spring comes earliest. In the Rockies, seasonal change is swift and dramatic. In just a few days, the slopes turn from white to green. Meadows that only a few weeks ago were buried beneath the snow are now full of life. But in these mountains, the good times will not last long. So the bears must feed as fast as they can. During the summer months, an adult can put on 180 kilos gorging on plants and, if they can catch them... - (MARMOT CALLS) - ...a marmot or two. But just now, the bears have something else on their minds. It's becoming warmer, and the bears are keen to shed their thick winter coats. Mothers show the cubs what to do about this. They'll soon catch on. Some trees, it seems, are particularly suitable for rubbing. Bears have their favourites and will travel long distances to visit them. Some itches just have to be scratched. There are now around 30 bears in this one valley. As they rub, each leaves an individual and recognisable scent. So the tree soon carries a list of who's around, which might help individuals to avoid a fight. To best spread their scent, they really have to put their back into it. (BEAR GRUNTS) But summer is short. Itches satisfactorily scratched, it's time to eat. In a couple of months, they will have to return to their dens to hibernate, so now they must put on as much weight as they can. Winter in the mountains returns fast and hits hard. (WIND HOWLS) Temperatures in the Rockies will drop to -54 degrees, so cold that moisture in the air freezes into tiny crystals called diamond dust. This bobcat is one of the few hunters to remain active in winter. Most of his prey is now hidden beneath the snow that covers his entire territory. He hunts by listening for the faintest sound of movement. And to prevent crunching footsteps from revealing his presence, he uses boulders as stepping stones. A mouse. But one is not enough. The deeper the snow, the harder it is to detect prey, and the rewards for the effort can be disappointing. To say the least. By midwinter, the snow is so deep that bobcats are forced to leave their territories to try and find easier hunting. And this bobcat may be in luck. For this particular valley is blessed. A river here never freezes. It's fed by a volcanic hot spring that heats these waters to 50 degrees warmer than the surrounding air. Hungry animals of all kinds come here to feed. Throughout the winter, the river is full of food for those who know how to catch it. Here, even the coyotes have become fishermen. But hunting is hard for a cat that's not used to getting its feet wet. So he must choose his target with care. Goldeneye ducks. But can he get close enough to pounce? (QUACKING) Perhaps he'll have more luck on the other side. Here, steam from the river warms the surrounding trees, so up in the branches, there could be prey. (CHIRPING) If only he could get to it. It's 20 feet up. At last... a squirrel. Not much, but enough to keep him going. To survive a winter in these mountains takes tenacity, and bobcats have that in abundance. Snow on the equator. Unlike the Rockies, in these mountains there are no marked seasons. This is Africa's Mount Kenya. It's 17,000 feet high, which makes its summit some 30 degrees colder than the surrounding savanna. Giant heathers, lobelias and groundsel grow on its upper slopes. They all thrive in the tropical sun. After all, every day is summer. But once the sun sets, every night becomes as bitterly cold as winter. The temperature drops to five degrees below freezing, turning the mountainside into a garden of ice. (CRACKLING) Everything freezes, but the cabbage groundsels have a way of protecting themselves. They close up their leathery leaves to form an insulating blanket that shields their vulnerable central bud. Night comes to an end and the sunshine returns. The groundsels spread their leaves wide to bask in the sunshine once again. Dawn in the High Andes. Here too, the rising sun brings rapid relief to animals living amongst these volcanic peaks. Mountain viscacha are up early to claim the best places to catch the sun's first rays. For others up here, the sunrise is even more welcome. At over 14,000 feet, this is the highest flamingo colony in the world. At night, it gets so cold that even this salty water freezes over. And now the flamingos are trapped in the ice. (FLAMINGOS CALL) Eventually, the sun thins the ice, but it's still a struggle for the flamingos to break free. Walking on thin ice is always risky. And it's hard to retain one's dignity especially when you're wearing stilts. At these altitudes, the sun's power can quickly turn from salvation to threat. The atmosphere is so thin, there is very little protection from ultraviolet radiation. By mid-morning, it's risky to linger out in the open. The viscacha are forced to head for the shade. Out on the lake, there is nowhere to hide. The white crust of the soda lake reflects the sun's glare and increases the impact of its ultraviolet rays. By midday, uncovered human skin will burn in four minutes. But this doesn't seem to bother the flamingos. In fact, they are on parade. During the breeding season, the flamingos perform these peculiar courtship dances even through the hottest time of the day. They are so eager, they don't even pause to feed. The rules are something of a mystery but, after a month of dancing, all the birds will have paired off and will be getting ready to mate. Up here, there are few other creatures to bother the flamingos, but then, few other creatures could even tolerate these conditions. So for animals that have the endurance, mountains can be sanctuaries. But rocky peaks which to us, perhaps, seem a symbol of permanence, are more fragile than they appear. Today in the Alps, human encroachment is changing even the highest summits. In the Rockies, rising temperatures are shortening winter hibernation and stifling the growth of valuable food plants. And in the Andes, some glaciers have shrunk by 50% in just 30 years. Even the Himalayas are now vulnerable. With most of the world's tallest peaks and covering a third of a million square miles, this is the greatest mountain range of all. And here, temperatures are now rising faster than the global average. As the snow line retreats further and further up these peaks, there is less and less space for wildlife, and that is a challenge for one of the most majestic of all mountain creatures. The snow leopard. Seldom seen, the detail of their lives has long been a mystery, but now, at last, helped by the latest remote-camera technology, we are getting closer to them than ever before. They are very rare... only about four of them in 40 square miles. There is simply not enough prey to sustain more. They live solitary lives. Nonetheless, they are well aware of the presence and the movements of their neighbours, because they leave messages in a few special places. They rub particular rocks with their cheeks and then spray them with urine. The two perfumes create a unique signature. (SQUIRTING) Any other leopard can know which of its neighbours passed this way, without ever making direct contact. But there are times when snow leopards must come together, and the event is often violent. An adult female and her daughter. She has devoted the last two years to raising her cub and very soon, it will be weaned. For now, the cub is still entirely dependent on its mother. But staying together as long as this could cause problems. The female is now in heat again, and any male that smells her signature will know that. (SQUIRTING) From this moment on, her cub's life is at risk. Males kill cubs that are not their own. But the mother is now driven by an urge that she cannot control. She lets the males know exactly where she is. (LEOPARD CALLS) From up here, she can be heard for miles around. (LEOPARD CALLS) A young male emerges from the wilderness, eager to find her. Snow leopards meet so infrequently that there is uncertainty and tension. And it's about to get worse. Another, bigger male has arrived. The mother and cub are trapped between the rivals. (GROWLING) The cub is now in danger. Mother must act fast. To divert the males' attention from her cub, she rolls over submissively. With the males fixed on the female, the cub has a chance to escape. (GROWLING) The males close in on the mother from both sides, keen to claim her for their own. A fight is inevitable. The female moves to escape and protect her cub. But the big male follows her. He will not let her leave until he has mated with her. With the males gone, the female is at last reunited with her cub. But she has been injured. The cub, however, is alive, thanks to its mother. Until her injury heals, she won't be able to hunt. Mountain animals survive on the very edge of existence. Mother and cub were not seen again. Until over a month later, high on a ridge, a remote camera was triggered. The female cat. She's no longer limping, but she's now alone. Then, an hour after the female has left, the camera is triggered again. It's her cub, taking her first steps towards adulthood and independence. She is unlikely to see her mother again. But every now and then, they will be reunited through the messages they leave on the marking rocks. Her mother has succeeded in raising her, but life ahead will be challenging, and she will spend nearly all of it alone. Only the toughest can survive among the savage beauty of the world's highest mountains. Revealing a new perspective on the lives of golden eagles in the mountains would take two very different approaches. A traditional wildlife crew set out to film wild eagles closer than ever before. Whilst an aerial team aimed to capture the hunting flights of eagles high in the mountains. The helicopter crew soon have success in filming wild eagles high over the Alps, but there was one part of the story even they couldn't follow. Golden eagles can stoop at 200 miles an hour. To capture an eagle's-eye view of such a dramatic flight would take a more extreme approach. I'm Aaron Durogati and I'm a professional paraglider pilot. Aaron believes that to fly like a bird, he must think like one, too. It's a very special feeling to fly with eagles because I'm really looking how they are thermalling and where they go to soar. This helps me to become a better pilot, and I try to take inspiration from the nature. Wearing a specially designed helmet camera, Aaron's aim is to film the perspective of a diving eagle. But before he can jump off a mountain, first he needs to climb it. It's a tough 3,000m ascent for Aaron and his wingman, Armin, as director Emma Brennand waits for news in the valley below. The ascent is slowed by a series of dangerous crevasses. After a tricky climb, they finally reach their launch site. But the weather up here is unpredictable and a change in wind direction makes it impossible to take off. Aaron and Armin are forced to overnight in the summit shelter, and with the cold knocking out their comms, Emma is worrying. They're well-trained mountain guides, but it doesn't make it any easier to know that. I think it's going to be a fairly restless night for me as well. Whilst the paragliders prepare for a night on the mountain cameraman Barrie Britton is setting out early on a more cautious quest to film wild golden eagles from a hide. I've got to get everything set while it's still dark and the eagles can't see what we're up to. Or if they saw any movement around the hide, then they'd fly away and probably wouldn't come back for a few days. They're notoriously difficult birds to film. Even hide work is not entirely without risks. It's -20 outside. So this is a crucial part of the operation, making sure the fire works so we don't freeze to death. Aah! Well, that's all the hairs gone on my hand! Oh, well! And we just have to be really quiet now and hope the eagles come in when first light comes up. Eight sedentary hours later, Barry's only reward is a dead leg. We haven't done a single shot today. Nothing has come. Anyway, that's the way it goes. After a long night on top of the mountain, the weather is only getting worse. The team need to get down, but visibility's so poor that descending on foot past the crevasses is too risky. Aaron decides it's safer to fly, but it'll be a bumpy ride. Thick cloud makes it hard to avoid the mountains, let alone film them. Thankfully, they make it down in one piece, much to Emma's relief. We are very, very glad to see you both. Yeah, it's a bit hard up there. The team spend the next two weeks chasing weather windows until at last, a clear flight. Trying to mimic a diving eagle, the flying looks spectacular, but the helmet-cam shots are less so. To stay safe at these speeds, Aaron must turn his head regularly to check his glider, and that is making the shots unusable. The team must quickly come up with a new plan. Back in the hide, all has been quiet until Barrie spots an eagle scavenging on a fox carcass. Barrie repositions his hide to keep watch. Good stuff! After 100 hours in the hide, finally, his luck changes. That's one terrifying bird there. For me, it's fantastic just to see them so close. It's just beautiful. With Barrie's success, it's now down to the paragliding team. They've come to the Mont Blanc range with a new plan. Aaron's decided that the best way to keep safe and get stable shots is to fly tandem with a cameraman. We've got to try and mimic how an eagle flies, which is pretty hard because they're basically like the top bird of prey. John is nervous. It's his first-ever flight. Three, two, one, go. Eee... ahh! Yes! Woohoo! - How is it? - Ah, man, that was a shock. Overcoming his initial fears, John begins filming. If you can go right of this, that'd be cool. The tandem wing allows John to get the shots that Aaron was unable to get flying solo. Awesome, Aaron, very good. But it's not all plain sailing. The feeling of discomfort only gets worse as Aaron begins the eagle dive. (JOHN LAUGHS) I feel sick! Oh, man! Flying low and fast like an eagle leaves little room for error. - A little bit too much, do you think? - Yeah! - Sorry, what did you call it, an unplanned landing? - Yeah! They might not be as majestic as a golden eagle, but they do capture a unique perspective that conveys an eagle's life as never before. Next time... we explore the world's jungles. Places of surprise and invention unrivalled on Earth where the battle for survival is at its most intense. Earth is the only planet we know of where life exists. And, here, it does so in abundance. The jungle is Eden. It covers less than 6% of the Earth's surface but it's home to half of all the plants and animals on land. Jungles have just the right amount of light, water and nutrients, and they have had every day for millennia. Life here should be easy. This is an indri. It's a primate, like us. And these forests in Madagascar are its home. But to survive here it has to face one major challenge. Paradise is crowded. Life fills every niche. And, at any one time, a staggering variety of species and countless individuals are striving for space and food. Like every jungle animal, indri have to find their own way to survive in the most competitive place on Earth. (INDRI WAILS) (INDRI WAILS) Jungles are complex places tangled three-dimensional worlds created by lush tropical vegetation. 90% of the animals here spend their whole lives up in the trees. And each of them has to find its own way of getting around. Hanging 100 feet above the ground, a spider monkey. They travel in family groups and find everything they need in the top storey of the jungle. Up here isn't a place for the faint-hearted. With long limbs and a prehensile tail that can grip like a hand, they're built for climbing. But imagine having to learn these skills as high up as this. One third of spider monkeys never make it to adulthood. This youngster is only a few months old. Her future depends on her ability to climb. Playing on a practice tree with her older brother and sister, she's already learning to use her tail as a safety line under her father's close watch. (THEY CHATTER) She's keen to join in the game but she's the youngest and, as is the way of things, she's not always welcome. (SHE GIBBERS) So she chooses her own place to play. But not all trees are the same. This one is for more advanced climbers. Enthusiasm? Certainly! (SHE GIBBERS) Technique? (SHE CHATTERS) Room for improvement. Meanwhile, some of her family have moved on to look for a new patch of fresh food. The top of the canopy isn't for youngsters. But Father's not looking and the temptation to join the others is irresistible. She'll need to be careful. A fall from here would mean certain death. It's the first time she's been as high as this on her own. As she climbs still higher, the branches get thinner and thinner. (SHE SCREECHES) (SHE SCREECHES) Her tail has caught her but now she's stuck in mid-air, unable to reach any other branch. (SHE SCREECHES) Father, however, was watching. He's big and strong enough to form a bridge with his body so that she can climb to safety. Lesson learned. But it's not just monkeys that live here, up in the treetops. And, if you are small, finding the right tree can mean a home for life. He's a Draco lizard. He's only the size of a pencil and he eats ants. This one tree could provide him with all he will ever need... a conveyor belt of food. It's a perfect place to settle down. Well, it would be but there's already someone here. This larger male is the tree's owner. And Dracos don't share. The owner's flag is a warning. Trespassers won't be tolerated. The owner's not only intimidating he's prepared to battle. A dead end. Safety is a long way away. Now he must choose. Fight or flee? Only in the jungle do you find lizards that can soar like dragons. He can travel over 100 feet in a single leap. It's a very fast and efficient way to move through the jungle. Maybe this new tree will have food and no resident owner. Everything in the jungle has to compete for space. Only 2% of the sun's rays reach the ground so even the plants must battle for the light they need if they're to grow. 300 years ago, this Hura tree began its race for light. And every day since, it has absorbed the water and sunshine it needed to grow into a giant. It has succeeded in doing what every tree must do to survive rise above the gloom of the jungle floor. And, what is more, its success has given life to others. Its branches now carry 1,000 other plants. These particular ferns, figs and orchids live only on the branches of other trees. 1,000 plants growing on one single tree. Throughout the forest, this story is repeated endless times. As a consequence, jungles are home to more species of plants than anywhere else on Earth. And they, in turn, support a wealth of animals. In Ecuador, the competition is at its most intense. Here, there are 100 species of hummingbirds alone all fighting for nectar. Each flower only has a small amount at any one time, and so it's first come, first served. One hummingbird has gone to great lengths to avoid conflict with other species. Swordbills are the only bird with a beak longer than their body. And some flowers are too elongated for the other 99 species of hummingbirds here to feed from them. A swordbill's extraordinary beak, however, enables it to reach the places that others can't the top of this flower, where the sweet nectar is produced. It has found a solution that means it doesn't have to join the fight. And, as each long flower blooms, it gives the swordbill a fresh supply of food all to itself. But having a beak longer than your body does have its drawbacks. For a start, it's tricky to keep it clean. Harder still, how do you preen your body feathers? Unlike the other hummers, swordbills can't reach their feathers with their beak. The only option, a good old scratch. It's a little unrefined but a small price to pay for an exclusive food supply especially when feeding times are only too frequently interrupted by storms. (THUNDER RUMBLES) Jungles are the richest places on Earth because of one remarkable fact they make their own weather. Every day, water rises from the surface of the leaves as vapour. It's as if the trees breathe out clouds. They gather over the forest until, finally they burst. Rain is the lifeblood of every jungle. And all have to do their best to endure the daily downpour. In some jungles, like here in Brazil, it rains so much that, for part of the year, the trees are almost totally submerged. The forest floor is 30 feet below the water's surface. This is a mysterious world, a place few people have ever explored. We have much to discover about the animals for which this is home including some you might never expect to find amongst trees. Here, 1,000 miles from the sea, are dolphins. A newly identified species of river dolphin found nowhere else on Earth. (DOLPHIN WHISTLES) In these black, tangled waters, they have become almost totally blind, so they move slowly, carefully using their sonar to scan the forest floor for fish. If this forest can hide a new species of dolphin what else might there be here, awaiting discovery? At the shallow margins of the flooded jungle, rivers flow through lush vegetation. Here, food is so abundant, it supports giants. Capybara, the biggest rodents in the world... (GRUNTING) ...giant otters the size of a man... (THEY SQUEAK) ...and the rulers of these rivers... (SPLASH) ...caiman. They grow to ten feet long and kill anything they get between their jaws. But there are more artful hunters drawn here from the surrounding forest. A jaguar, the supreme jungle predator. The river marks the edge of his territory but here he has competition. (THEY GROWL) (THEY ROAR) (THEY GROWL) He's now in the territory of a female. She has ruled this stretch of river for five years. This is her place to hunt. Capybara are strong and wary. The key is stealth. She needs to get within three feet if she's to pounce. Not this time. She's not the only female here. Each part of this jungle's edge is ruled by a different queen. Few places on Earth have enough food to support so many big cats. (LOW GROWL) The male hunts in a different way. Weighing almost 300 lbs, it's hard to be stealthy and with so many other jaguars around, he doesn't bother with wary capybara. He seeks a different prey. He's become a killer of killers. Jaguars have the most powerful bite of any cat. And he knows the caiman's most vulnerable point the back of its skull. (CRUNCHING) Hunters living in the dense understorey of the jungle come in all shapes and sizes. But they share a problem. How to tell what is a plant, and what is prey. This is a game of hide and seek that can be won or lost in the blink of an eye. The long contest between predator and prey has produced mimicry of astounding accuracy. A leaf-tailed gecko masquerading as lichen. Some animals take camouflage a stage further still and these streams in Costa Rica are home to one of the most remarkable. A glass frog. A male, and tiny, no bigger than your fingernail and almost entirely transparent as he needs to be. Almost everything that walks past here could eat him, even a cricket. His best chance is to stay absolutely still and trust that the cricket looks right through him. Danger passed, and that's just as well, because he is a father and he's guarding some very precious eggs. For the last few weeks, females, one after the other, have visited him and entrusted him with their offspring. Some are now almost ready to hatch. There are several clutches on the leaf, and those at the top, the most recently laid, are barely a day old. But in the jungle, there's always someone out to get you. This wasp is a specialist hunter of frogs' eggs. It's noticed the wriggling tadpoles at the bottom of the leaf. He mustn't move. The youngest eggs are the most vulnerable, and he can't guard them all. But these tadpoles are not as helpless as they might appear. Incredibly, the unhatched tadpoles can sense danger, and the oldest and strongest wriggle free and drop into the stream below. The eggs at the top of the leaf, however, are still too young to hatch, and now the wasps know they're there. But the male's back looks very like the youngest cluster of eggs and that seems to confuse the wasps. Using his own body as a decoy is a huge risk. The wasp stings could kill him. He's managed to save most of his young. He'll have to remain on guard for another two weeks, but in the jungle, just surviving the day can count as a success. With the coming of the night, a new cast of jungle characters takes to the stage. Flying insects begin to glow as they search for mates. Fungi, unlike plants, thrive in the darkness of the forest floor. They're hidden until they begin to develop the incredible structures with which they reproduce. Each releases millions of microscopic spores that drift invisibly away. Many have fruiting bodies that reach upwards to catch any feeble current there might be in the clammy air. But this one, as it grows, becomes luminous. Why fungi light up has remained a mystery until now. Scientists studying the brightest fungi in the world think they may have an answer. Like a beacon, the light attracts insects. From far and wide. To this click beetle, a bright light means only one thing... a female click beetle, so he flashes in reply. But he doesn't get the reception he was expecting. Confused, he starts searching for a female, and that helps the fungus. By the time he gives up, he's covered in the fungus's spores. And, as he continues his quest for a female, he carries these spores to other parts of the forest. And there are even stranger things glowing in the jungle night. These are the multicoloured lights of a railroad worm. It's not really a worm, but a poisonous, caterpillar-like beetle. The yellow lights warn other creatures to keep out of its way. It's hunting for millipedes. When it finds the trail of one, it switches off its yellow lights. Now it only has a red light on its head. Millipedes can't see red light. So, to them, the railroad worm in stealth mode is virtually invisible. And that is the end of the millipede. Competition in the jungles forces animals to specialise in every aspect of their life, including courtship. This has produced some of the most beautiful and elaborate displays on the planet. - (BIRD SQUAWKS) - A male red bird-of-paradise, competing to attract a female by dancing. One has come to survey what's on offer. She is an independent lady, and she will select whichever male takes her fancy. (BIRDS SQUAWKING) She makes her choice. But now she doesn't seem quite so sure. No? Perhaps he's just a little too keen. Maybe he'll have better luck tomorrow. Red birds-of-paradise display in the treetops. Other members of the family dance in the gloom of the forest floor. This is a Wilson's bird-of-paradise. He's brightly coloured, but about the size of a sparrow. He's lived most of his life alone, but now he's an adult, and he too needs to attract a mate. This little patch of light might help him do so. First, he tidies things up. Showing off in this jumble of leaves wouldn't be easy, and his beauty will stand out better against a plain background. He doesn't want bright leaves to divert a visitor's attention. They all need to go. Even the green ones. Especially the green ones. His stage is set. A central pole, and a little patch of light. It's perfect. And now, he must hope a female hears his call. (HIGH-PITCHED SQUAWKING) He can wait here for weeks on end. At last, a female. Time to take up position. She will judge him by the brightness of his feathers. But for the female to see him at his best, he needs her to perch directly above his stage, under the light. This might be his only chance to shine. Now, when she's looking directly down on him, he reveals a display for her eyes only. In the gloom of the forest floor, he is a dazzling blaze of iridescent green. The brightest leaf in the forest. And that does the trick. Each animal must find its own way of surviving the competition of the jungle. This crowded world is so full of invention that almost all kinds of animals on land can trace their origins back here including us. These forests in Madagascar are home to one of our distant cousins. This female indri has fought to keep this particular patch of forest safe for herself and her family. (HIGH-PITCHED SHRIEKS) Every morning, the family come together to sing, their way of reminding others that this is their home. Indri are so closely adapted to living here that now they can live nowhere else. For them and the billions of animals with whom they share their home, the jungle is a sanctuary. But this is changing. Even in the ten years since the head of this family was born, one million hectares of the rainforest have been destroyed in Madagascar alone, and, with it, half the indri families that once lived there. The local people say the indris are our brothers and their song is a call to remind us that we, too, once depended on the jungle. This Eden is still a place of wonder and magic. Something, surely, worth protecting. Jungles are still some of the least explored places on Earth, and with good reason. They are testing places to work. Here in the flooded forests of Brazil, the team are on the trail of a newly discovered species of river dolphin. So little is known about it that just finding it will be a challenge. Their base for five weeks is a hut on the only bit of dry land around, but it's already occupied. It appears someone's been making a nest. A resident rat. - Hello, little rat. - And on the food cupboard... Hello. Are you a bit shy? If the housemates are hostile, the hitchhikers are even worse. A large spider. Oh, my God. And a colony of aggressive red ants looking for a ride. Shall we knock into them? They'll board the boat like a bunch of pirates, and they'll gnaw our faces off. That might not be quite true, but intimidating animals are the least of their problems. The flooded forest is not only vast, it's impenetrable, and this new species of dolphin could be anywhere in 150,000 square miles of tangled treetops. But the crew have a plan. Dolphins use sound to find their way through the flooded forest by making clicks. Sonar. Waterproof microphones allow the crew to eavesdrop on the dolphins, and so follow them. But that's easier said than done. So, this is the clear path. Can you see it? There. It takes them a week to get their first glimpse of this new species, and even then, it lasts less than a second. There appears to be only one dolphin. And, frustratingly, it can pop up anywhere without warning. Been looking through the water and seeing bodies kind of appear out of the murk, and then disappear again. Eventually, the dolphin leads the crew to an open gap in the forest. We made it! Yay! Here, at last, there may be a chance of getting something in the can. Their first shot, but again, a single breath, and then it's gone. - Hello, you. - With the dolphin as close as this, the crew can try a different technique... towing an underwater camera behind the boat. Dolphin literally just came up parallel to it. The problem is that the water is so murky, that the dolphin is almost invisible, even when right next to the camera. However, now the dolphin is in this channel, the crew can try a different tack. Michael Sanderson is a drone operator. As long as the dolphin's in open water, it might be possible to follow it from the air. We've worked out the dolphins seem to be here, and we can do the drone work, so this is our kind of best bet. Leaving Michael and his drone on the sand spit, the crew head back to open water. But this is called the flooded forest for a reason. The rain here can be torrential, and although storms normally pass quickly, this one is clearly not a normal storm. Is it not working? The motor has broken, and with the boat flooding, the crew must head for the bank. It looked like the rainstorm was going to pass, and it hasn't passed at all. It's very, very heavy, and I'm soaked through to the skin. They're stranded, the kit is getting drenched, trees are falling, and Michael is trapped somewhere down-river. This is the hardest rain I've ever seen in my life. - It's incredible. - I'm hoping Michael's all right. And there's been tree fall all up around behind us. Michael's down there on a tiny little sand spit, with the other boat, with his opticopter out. Kind of scary. After two hours, a break in the storm gives Michael a chance to rejoin the team. Just got caught in one of the heaviest storms I've ever seen. Got up to this much water on the tarp, and the other one, so I don't know if this is going to live any more, because that was on the floor. It looks like it's game over for the drone. Yeah, it was pretty scary, wasn't it? Over the next 12 hours, the storm returns again and again. If this bad weather continues, the crew may not be able to get back out to the dolphin. The next morning, clear skies, and the drone might be fixable. But the longer it takes, the more chance that the dolphin will have returned to the flooded forest, and then it'll be back to square one. But finally, their luck is in. The dolphin is still there. For the first time, they have a chance to film from the water and the air, and finally discover what this elusive animal is really doing. They were in the boat and they were looking around and going, "Yeah, there are some bubbles." We were flying with the drone and we could see dolphins, and while they thought they could only see one dolphin, we saw five. And they had no idea. The crew are surprised to find these dolphins aren't solitary, but come together to hunt as a team. You're starting to see stuff with the drone that you suddenly go, "I thought there was one dolphin there," and then you count that there are five and then you're looking in one place and they're all behind you, laughing at you. This new perspective has given the crew a first glimpse into a mysterious jungle animal in one of the least-known corners of the Earth. Next time... a land of extremes that pushes life to the limit. Animals have extraordinary ways of dealing with the hostile conditions. Creating the most epic survival stories on Earth. These are deserts. Imagine a world where temperatures rise to 120 degrees Fahrenheit. Where there's no escape from sun, wind and dust. Imagine a world with almost no food or water. These are the conditions in one third of the lands of our planet. To live here demands the most extraordinary survival strategies. This is the oldest desert in the world. The Namib in south-west Africa. It's been dry for 55 million years. Life here for a hunter is as hard as it gets. A pride of lions. One of the very few that endures this desert's scorching temperatures and lack of water. Hunting here presents special problems. A herd of oryx, the only prey within 20 miles. Out here, there is no cover for an ambush. It'll have to be a straight chase. They have failed and each failed hunt brings the lions closer to starvation. To find enough to eat, the pride continually searches an area the size of Switzerland. Three days and 100 miles later, and still no kill. These are desperate times. (BIRDS CAW) A dry riverbed on the edge of their territory. The only animals here are giraffe, but these one-tonne giants could kill a lion with a single kick. Lions seldom tackle such formidable prey but this pride can't go on much longer without food. The whole pride must work together as a team if they're to succeed. Two lionesses lead the chase. Others race to cut off possible escape routes. The giraffe has the speed and stamina to outrun the pride but it's being chased into a trap. Up ahead, the lead female waits. It's now up to her. Most lion hunts end in failure. But no lions fail more often than those that live in the desert. Once again, the pride must continue their search. (THUNDER RUMBLES) It does, sometimes, rain in the desert. Here, in the American West, storms can strike with devastating force. After ten months of drought, millions of tonnes of water are dumped on the land in under an hour. Over millions of years, sand and gravel carried by the rampaging floods have carved channels through the solid rock. Slot canyons, 150 feet deep. In some places, these canyons have widened until the land between them is sculpted into tablelands and isolated pinnacles, some of the most dramatic landscapes on the planet. The rain may be long gone but there is water here locked away within the tissues of specialist desert plants. Cacti are unique to American deserts. They all hoard water, storing it in swollen stems and protecting it behind a barricade of spines. They're so successful that they dominate these deserts. But this forest of spikes can cause problems for the animals that live here. A Harrisxxx hawk. It has developed special techniques for hunting amongst the cacti. Ground squirrels. Prey. At the first sign of danger they bolt for the safety of the thorns. But the hawks have a tactic to flush them out. These are the only birds of prey that hunt in packs. Flying in formation, they try to drive their quarry into the open. But this squirrel is staying put. So now the hawks continue the hunt on foot. They're closing in from all sides. Soon, all escape routes are cut off. The squirrel is trapped. The spines that cover almost every plant in this desert can provide protection and shelter for many animals. So, why should these spikes be hung with corpses? What kind of creature could be responsible for creating such a gruesome scene? There's a mysterious killer at work in this desert. It's a butcherbird. This little songbird uses the spines as a butcher uses his hook... to hold its prey as it dismembers it. (CHICKS SQUAWK) And with chicks to feed, he also uses the spines as a larder. He's been stocking it for weeks. Hanging his prey out of the reach of scavengers on the ground ensures that his newly hatched young will never go hungry. An ingenious solution to making the good times last in the desert if a little macabre. (CHICKS SQUAWK) Some deserts are so arid, they appear totally devoid of all vegetation. Yet even these landscapes can be transformed in a matter of days. The deserts of Peru are amongst the driest in the world, but just add a little water and plants that have lain dormant for months will burst into life. And when a desert suddenly turns green, even the most seemingly desolate can become a land of opportunity. No creature exploits the greening of a desert more quickly or more dramatically than a locust. Madagascar's arid south-west has received its highest rainfall in years. Now, an army is on the march, attracted by the smell of newly sprouting grass. Locusts are normally solitary creatures, but when food becomes suddenly plentiful they come together into an unstoppable force that devours everything in its path. But this devastation is about to get a lot worse. The locusts now transform into winged adults, and with conditions as good as this, they do so three times faster than normal. Now they are at their most voracious... and with wings, they can take to the skies. Once airborne, the locusts can travel over 60 miles a day in their search for new feeding grounds. A super swarm of this scale may only appear once in a decade. This one extends over 200 square miles and contains several billion individuals. Between them, they will devour Nothing can strip a land of its vegetation with such speed and thoroughness as a plague of locusts. When the food eventually runs out, the whole army will die... but not before it's devastated the land. With no plants to bind them, thin soils soon turn to dust and blow away. Now, these barren lands are left to the mercy of the elements. Scorched by the sun and scoured by windblown sand, desert rock is shaped into strange, otherworldly landscapes. These rocky deserts may have a beguiling beauty, but when they become this barren, very little life can endure. For many animals, the only way to survive the most hostile times is to keep moving. In the Kalahari, brief rains have given way to the dry season. Food and water are becoming increasingly scarce. For these zebra, it's time to leave. They're setting off on the longest overland migration made by any mammal in Africa, marching towards the scent of distant rains. As drought intensifies, desert-living elephants must also undertake long journeys in search of water. The older females can remember where, even in times of extreme drought, there may still be water and sometimes lead the herd to a water hole they may not have visited for decades. These zebra are almost at the end of their journey. This is what they've been heading for a rare water hole. In deserts, most water holes are short lived. They appear after rains, but then vanish almost as quickly as they came. Animals have come here from many miles around. Yet this can be a dangerous place in which to linger. 60 miles away, in the heart of the desert, sandgrouse chicks are hatching. It's safer for them to be here. But being so distant from water is a gamble. With only their mother to shield them from the sun, if they get nothing to drink, they will be dead within hours. Their only hope is their father. Every morning he makes the 120-mile round trip to get water for the family. Grouse from all over the desert visit this oasis, arriving together in large flocks, and that is important. There's safety in numbers. The male snatches a drink, but he also needs to collect water for his chicks. Using specially adapted breast feathers, he can soak up water like a sponge. But it takes time, and he is in danger. Goshawk. Sandgrouse here are their main prey. Again and again, the male sandgrouse risk their lives in order to collect water for their chicks. This is why sandgrouse nest so far from water holes. At last, he's soaked up as much as he can. Carrying a quarter of his body weight in water, he can now set off on the long journey home. He's back, and just in time. He can give the chicks their first ever drink. But he will have to undertake this perilous journey every day for the next two months until his chicks can finally make the flight to the water hole for themselves. It's July in the deserts of Nevada in the western United States. The hottest time of the year. Bands of wild horses, mustang, are converging on one of the last remaining water holes for miles. Now, water not only offers them the chance to drink, it can also bring power. If a stallion can control access to water, he will have secured mating rights to the entire herd. So stallions try to dominate these pools, fighting off rivals who venture too close. A stranger. He's travelled ten miles to be here because the pools where he's come from have already dried up. With him come his females. If he can't provide them with water, they will leave him for the white stallion who already dominates this pool. So, he will have to fight. There is everything to lose. A broken leg or a shattered jaw would mean a slow and painful death. A missed kick, and it's all over. The new arrival has won... and his prize is more than just the chance to drink. He has provided for his herd, and in the process, stolen his rival's females. The white stallion's rule is over. Desert life is not only shaped by the scarcity of water, but also by the relentless power of the sun. The highest temperatures on Earth have all been recorded in its deserts. Changes in the climate mean temperatures here are rising more than the global average and, as deserts heat up, they are also expanding. Every year, a further 50,000 square miles of grass and farmland are turning into barren stretches of dust and rock. In the heat of the day, surface temperatures can reach 160 degrees, far too hot to handle for most. But not for this shovel-snouted lizard. Raising its feet off the ground in turn enables each to briefly cool. But even this dancing desert specialist can't stand the heat for long. One option is to find shade. Dune grass, the only vegetation here, provides virtually none, but just an inch beneath the surface of the sand, it is several degrees cooler. Avoiding the extreme heat imposes a rhythm on desert life. And many animals here choose the simplest option of all staying hidden all day, and only venturing out in the cool of the night. As darkness falls, animals appear from seemingly nowhere. And, among them, inevitably, are hunters. One of the most voracious nocturnal predators is also one of the hardest to see. This mysterious creature hardly ever appears on the surface of the dunes. But there are signs on the sand that can give it away. It lives only here, where the sand grains are so perfectly dry and polished, that they flow almost like water. It's no bigger than a ping-pong ball. A golden mole. It's totally blind, but there's nothing to see underground anyway. Instead, it has superb hearing. Its entire head acts as an amplifier that picks up vibrations through the sand, so, to locate prey on the surface of the dune, it has, paradoxically, to thrust its face into the dune. Termites. Not easy to catch when you're blind. Far better to go into stealth mode. Once below the sand, it can detect the slightest movement allowing it to strike with pinpoint accuracy. Well, most of the time. They can travel two thirds of a mile a night in search of its dinner and right now, it has just detected its main course. Little wonder it's sometimes called "the shark of the dunes". Food can be so scarce in the desert that, even at night, animals can't afford to be choosy about what they eat. Israel's Negev desert. Otonycteris, the desert long-eared bat, is on the hunt. Most bats catch flying insects on the wing, but there are so few of these in the desert that this bat must do things differently. It has to hunt on the ground. But what really sets it apart is what it's hunting a deathstalker scorpion. The venom of this species is potent enough to kill a human. Tackling it seems madness for a bat weighing just half an ounce. In the pitch-black, both predator and prey are effectively blind, but the scorpion has one advantage... he can sense the approach of the bat through vibrations in the sand. Otonycteris must rely entirely on its hearing. If the scorpion doesn't move, it won't know it's there. The battle is on. Armed with crushing pincers and a sting loaded with venom, this scorpion is a dangerous opponent. A direct strike on the head. Is it all over? Not for this bat. Otonycteris clearly has some immunity to the venom, but repeated stings must still be extraordinarily painful. And if the bat is not to go hungry, it must catch another three scorpions before sunrise. Desert animals have developed remarkable strategies to make the most of the rare opportunities that come their way. Although some deserts may not see rain for several years, most will hold a little water in one form or another. The trick is simply knowing how to reach it. Dawn in the dunes of the Namib, and something magical is happening. Moist air lying over the neighbouring Atlantic is cooled and blown inland, forming fog banks that shroud the desert in mist. This precious moisture lies tantalisingly out of reach at the top of the dunes, and it won't last long. It'll be burnt off by the sun just hours after it rises. Darkling beetles race to the top of the dunes to reach the fog before it vanishes. Some of the Namib's dunes are 1,000 feet high, the tallest in the world. For a beetle no larger than a thumbnail, this is the equivalent of us climbing a dune twice the height of Everest. But even more impressive is what it does next. Standing perfectly still, facing into the wind, the beetle does a headstand. Fog begins to condense on its body. Microscopic bumps on its wing cases direct the water to grooves that channel it towards the mouth. Before returning down the slip face, it will drink 40% of its body weight. This little beetle has learned how to conjure water out of the air in one of the driest places on earth. And it's not alone on the top of the dunes. Web-footed geckos use a similar trick. Surely, few animals go to greater lengths to get a drink. Unfortunately, Namaqua chameleons know that on foggy mornings, the beetles coming down the dunes are juicier than those going up. The diversity of life that thrives in a world almost totally devoid of water is truly remarkable. Success in the desert depends on an extraordinary variety of survival strategies that have evolved over millions of years. But our planet is changing. The world's deserts are growing bigger, hotter and drier, and they're doing so faster than ever before. How life will cope here in the future remains to be seen. Finding animals in these vast empty landscapes was a persistent problem for the Deserts team. But surely this wouldn't be the case when they set out to film one of the greatest concentrations of wildlife on earth. It can't be hard to find a billion locusts, can it? OK. With news that freak rains have triggered a mass emergence of locusts in a remote part of Madagascar, the team sets off in pursuit. We've got some young hopper locusts just crossing the road in front of us here. We've just had to stop the cars. Here they are, here, all on the side of the road, look. It looks promising. But though finding hoppers is easy, filming them proves more of a challenge. Can we rethink this? Because it's not really working. The locusts are really skippy. Any kind of movement, they just freak out, So we're now doing our best locust-herding techniques to try to get them to go in front of the lens, which is proving harder than anticipated. This is my Monday morning locust-herding jazz hands. - Ah! - What? What's that? - What? - It's a wasp nest. Soon, the crew find themselves surrounded by locusts. No need for jazz hands now. It's a good start, but the team still need to film the winged swarms that complete the story. But, once airborne, they can travel 60 miles a day, so finding a swarm won't be easy. Fortunately, the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation are here, too, to help. The FAO are on a mission to eradicate the plagues decimating crops across Madagascar, and if anyone knows where the locusts are, it's the local expert, Hasibelo. He thinks that they are moving this way. Time to go swarm-chasing. But chasing is the operative word. The locusts always seem one step ahead. It's amazing, really, because this plan's completely - radically changing, hour by hour. - We now have to travel several hours further north, which is... - a bit of a pain. - It's a bit of a pain. As they venture into the unknown, it's clear it's been a very wet year indeed. Traffic is one thing, but boats on the road? Unconventional traffic. Progress is slow, and soon stops altogether. The locusts are just across the water, so the team must follow on this. What could possibly go wrong? We're now stuck on, possibly, the world's most antiquated raft trying to cross a very fast-flowing river. But, onwards and upwards. We've now got an hour-long river crossing, and we'll just have to see what's on the other side. With the river behind them, it should be plain sailing. But once across, the team discovers that, yet again, the locusts are nowhere to be seen. And, after two weeks on the road, the local street food is beginning to take its toll. So Ed's not very well. Been yacking up and... And not very nice stomach. We just need to do whatever it takes now to get us to where the swarms are. The next day, the team forges on. Briefly. Here's Jamal, our driver. What do we think? Yeah? No? The road has turned into a bog. The cars can go no further. We need to cross this area of water to get to the savanna and find our locust swarms. And it's amazing to think that, with the combined might of the United Nations and the BBC, we are eventually defeated by a puddle. Back to the drawing board. Once again, it's Hasibelo to the rescue. Well, we have a plan. Taking to the air was never on the cards, but thanks to the FAO's helicopter, the team can now play the locusts at their own game. More smoke? This time, it's a billion locusts and one very relieved producer. Woohoo! Against the odds, the team has located a super-swarm. This is exactly what we've been looking for. We've driven halfway across Madagascar to one of the most remote parts there is. It's just been a nightmare, but, finally, we're here. I mean, this is the biggest swarm we could have even hoped for. It is just amazing. Look at here, I'm going to film here. It's incredibly exhilarating, and yet totally shocking, to think of the devastation that swarms like this are causing. It just makes you realise how important the FAO are in getting this under control. I'm just going to run through it. I should be naked for this, but... Thankfully, Rob kept his clothes on, and, more importantly, this plague has now been halted, but not before the team had witnessed one of the biggest swarms ever recorded on film. Next time, we journey to the world's great plains, where spectacular gatherings of wildlife cope with extreme change and surprising creatures survive in unexpected ways. One quarter of all the land on Earth is covered by a single, remarkable type of plant. Almost indestructible, it can grow two feet in a day... And be tall enough to hide a giant. That plant is grass, and the world it creates is truly unique. The grass in northern India is the tallest on the planet, home to some of the most impressive creatures to tread the Earth. These are the good times, but in just a few months, all this fresh growth will be gone, and the animals will be forced to move on. That is the way things are on grasslands across the planet. A cycle of abundance, destruction and rebirth that affects every creature that lives here. The largest grassland on Earth, the vast Eurasian Steppe, stretches one third of the way around our planet. Spring rain has brought fresh grass, and with it, new life. A relic from the Ice Age, a baby Saiga antelope, just three hours old. His only company, his twin. Until they can stand, their mother has left them hidden in the grass. They should be safe, as long as they remain quiet. For these calves, the clock is already ticking. Their herd will soon be moving on, seeking the freshest new grass. Their lanky legs are a sure sign that they're built for a life on the move. Saiga always give birth to twins, so their numbers grow rapidly just when grass is plentiful. Their bizarrely shaped nose can detect fresh growth from hundreds of miles away. The young twins will now begin the nomadic life they share with most animals on the world's open plains. Grasslands occur where rain is too sporadic for forests to exist. The rain that a grassland needs to survive for a year might arrive all at once. Storms like these can release Not much fun if you're out in it. Eventually the earth can't soak up any more, and the grassland undergoes a radical change. Many plants would drown here, but grasses thrive. They grow so fast, their leaves quickly rise above the water and into the sunlight. Here in southern Africa, water transforms one of the most remarkable grasslands on Earth, the Okavango. Every year, 5,000 square miles of grassland are flooded. For one pride of lions, this poses a major problem. There may be plenty of prey around, but lions struggle to run it down in water. The pride has three-month-old cubs. They've never seen water before. If their mothers don't make a kill soon, the cubs might not survive the week. But fuelled by the flood, the eruption of grass attracts new possible prey. Buffalo arrive in herds 2,000 strong. Powerful, aggressive and united, they're the most dangerous animal a lion can face. The biggest bulls don't run. They're simply too huge to be scared of lions. At 900 kilos, he weighs more than all five lionesses combined. The pride do have numbers on their side, but one sweep of his horns could be deadly. One distracts the bull up front, while her sisters attack from behind. The cats must somehow topple the buffalo, but with swamp under foot, they can't get any traction. The bull is weakening, but the lions are tiring, too. It's now a battle of will as much as strength. To live, the bull must somehow shake off the lioness. The bull is wounded, but thanks to his two-inch-thick hide, he will recover. For the pride, these are hungry times. But, ultimately, once the water recedes, there will be new life, and new food to benefit all. In the right conditions, grasses have the extraordinary ability to grow from first shoots to flower in a matter of only days. Grasses become the miniature equivalents of fruiting trees. And for creatures living within the grass, this is a landscape as vast and towering as any rainforest. And excellent place to build a tiny tree house for a harvest mouse. During summer, European meadowlands are full of food, but only for those that can reach it. Climbing grass is harder than climbing trees, not least because their stems just won't stay still. Her prehensile tail acts like a fifth limb, so she's as agile as a monkey clambering around in a tree. And just as well, for the best food in this tiny forest is at the very top of its canopy. Feeding up here, she's exposed. A barn owl. Not her finest move... But it did the trick. Harvest mice seldom go all the way down to the ground. It's a tangled and dangerous world down here. But she can read the pattern of the stems overhead like a map, and so find her way home. And not a minute too soon. There are mouths to feed. Her babies must fatten up quickly. They need to harvest the summer grasses while they're still rich with food. On the African savannah, too, seasonal grasses are filled with life, but it won't last long. Carmine bee-eaters are superb aerial hunters, experts at catching insects in midair. But they have no way of flushing their prey out of the grass. Once alarmed, most insects stay put. The bee-eaters need someone to stir things up a bit. A kori bustard. It's the world's heaviest flying bird, so it should be bulky enough to kick up some insects. Bingo! Until someone else comes along and cramps your style. Never mind, perhaps there are bigger opportunities ahead. What about an ostrich? The heaviest bird of all. This time there's more than enough transport to go around. Soon, almost every ostrich has its own passenger. But free riders are only tolerated for so long. What the bee-eaters really need is a creature so big it won't even notice them. Nothing cuts a swathe through grass like an African bull elephant. The trick is to fly as close to the front of the giant as possible. They only have a split second to grab the prize. As more insects are stirred up, the competition intensifies. With summer drawing to a close, the race to stock up is on. Soon, the grass will wither, and this opportunity will have gone. As the dry season takes hold, food becomes increasingly thin on the ground. Now, only the most specialised predators on the plains can make a living. She may be spotted like a cheetah, but this cat is no sprinter. Instead, she has extra-long legs which give her a high vantage point. But a serval cat's main weapon are enormous radar ears. They help her pinpoint prey hiding in the grass. But the prey she seeks are canny. Southern vlei rats. They know that any sustained movement can give them away. So they move in short bursts. But even the slightest rustle will give her a clue. Warm. Warmer. Missed. In better times, she could catch 10 a day, but now, with so few rodents around, she will have to go hungry. As drought intensifies, life gets tougher for all. Predators with permanent territories must tough it out, while most of their prey disappear over the horizon. To avoid starvation, many grassland animals follow a nomadic way of life. Over 2,000,000 wildebeests wander the East African savannahs chasing the rains. And they are not alone. Arriving on the wing, Jackson's Widowbirds also seek fresh grass. Although, it's not just food that they're after. This male wants a mate. He's grown elaborate breeding plumage for this moment, but he needs a stage on which to show it off. By carefully selecting grass blades, each trimmed to the correct length, he's creating something very special. He needs an even surface, and a centre-piece. The stage is set. His bachelor pad is sufficiently neat and tidy to attract a female. The problem is, can she see it? He has competition. It might take more than a little gardening to impress the ladies. Jumping is the right idea, but he's misjudged the height of the grass. His rival makes it look easy. Time to raise his game. It's not only who jumps the highest, but who can keep doing so the longest. Unable to go the distance, his rivals drop out one by one. Stamina has won him admirers, now he can show off his courtship arena... And engage in a little romantic hide-and-seek. Finally, he's done enough. The East African savannahs support millions of grazers. Each year they devour millions of tons of grass, and yet there's one creature here whose impact is far greater than all these animals combined. They're found wherever grass grows on the planet, yet their labours go almost entirely unnoticed. One of the most remarkable is found here on the grasslands of South America. These blades are so tough that virtually no large grass eaters can stomach them. Yet they're harvested on an industrial scale by tiny grass cutter ants. But they themselves can't digest one bit of it. So, why bother? The answer is underground, and it's very ingenious. Each blade is cut to length and placed into a garden of fungus. The rotting grass feeds the fungus, and in turn the fungus feeds the ants. But feeding 5,000,000 workers requires intensive agriculture. Luckily, they are an industrious lot. This colony alone will collect over half a ton of grass every year. With billions of ant colonies across the world's grasslands all doing exactly the same thing, that's a mind-boggling amount of grass. It's estimated that over one third of the grass that grows on Earth will be harvested by an insect. In northern Australia, termites memorialise their industry in sculpture. These astonishing mounds are 10 feet tall. They're always built on a north-south axis, which is why their builders are called compass termites. These castles of clay protect their builders from extremes of heat and seasonal floods experienced on many grasslands. Termites manage to do what most grass eaters can't, break down dead grass and extract the nutrients. But they themselves can be food for those that can reach them. A two-foot-long tongue covered in microscopic hooks, followed by claws longer than those of a velociraptor. A giant anteater on the plains of South America. It can devour 20,000 insects a day. Powerful forelegs enable it to rip apart a termite hill with ease. And as the sun bakes the grass, the termites face new danger. In minutes, fire turns grassland to ash. But the grasses are not dead. Their underground stems are unharmed. Weeks, months may pass, but eventually the rains will return and the grass will sprout again. Some grasslands must endure not only fire, but ice. As winter approaches, the prairies of North America begin to freeze. In summer, bison roamed freely, almost continuously cropping the abundant green grass. Now, that grass is not only withered and frozen, it's about to be buried. Sixty million tons of snow now blanket this herd's territory. Pushing through deep snow is exhausting work, and the bison are now slowly starving. Just keeping warm saps huge amounts of energy. Their thick coats can insulate them down to minus 20 Fahrenheit. It's now minus 40. The only thing that will keep them alive is buried beneath three feet of snow. And that's a problem shared with a surprising neighbour. The food the fox seeks is also deep beneath the snow. The survival of both creatures depends on getting through to the ground. For the bison, it will be a matter of brute strength. Massive neck muscles enable them to shovel five tonnes of snow a day. Their light-weight neighbour needs more precision. The bison have reached their goal, a mouthful of withered grass. And where the bison have dug, the fox now spots an opportunity. Every footstep counts, but he mustn't break through... Yet. He listens carefully to pinpoint his target. It's moving. A vole. Small, but 100 times more nutritious than a mouthful of dried grass. To get through the winter on these prairies, sometimes brain beats brawn. Ultimately, life on all grasslands depends on the turn of the seasons. Five hundred miles further north than any tree can survive, grass returns to life. Caribou females have journeyed to the far north to calve. Over 70,000 caribou babies will be born in the next few days. As the calves appear, so too do the leaves of the newly sprouting grass. And the calves must strengthen quickly. Within days they will have to keep up with their parents on a never-ending march. At one day old, they're already faster than an Olympic sprinter. They're testing the legs that will carry them thousands of miles, better to learn their limitations now. It may look playful, but there's no harder life on the grasslands than that facing these infants. The caribou mothers now join together, each with an infant exactly the same age. They're setting off on the greatest overland trek made by any animal. But wherever grass eaters travel, predators lie in wait. Here they are, Arctic wolves. They must seize their chance while the caribou pass through their territory. The wolf runs at the herd, trying to flush out the weak or the slow. A calf is separated. At full tilt, 40 miles an hour, the wolf is just faster. But the calf has stamina. Only a few weeks old, and this calf's will to survive is remarkable. And it needs to be, for these young caribou have now started a journey that will last a lifetime. Forever chasing the seasonal growth of the grass on which they depend. Like all grassland creatures, they are at the mercy of these unpredictable but ultimately bountiful lands. Grass can survive some of the harshest conditions on Earth, flood, fire and frost, and still flourish. So it is that grasslands provide a stage for the greatest gatherings of wildlife on planet Earth. For the grasslands team, no location would prove as challenging as that dominated by elephant grass in northeast India. The aim, to capture intimate images of some the world's most elusive creatures using the latest technology. But they will need to be careful. More people are killed by wildlife here in Kaziranga than in any other national park on the planet. Every time we go into these tunnels, we have to take an armed guard, 'cause there are so many animals in here that are dangerous. Tigers are probably the least of our worries, but rhinos and buffalo, elephants, sloth bear, all of them can injure you. And we gotta keep up with our armed guard. The team have bumped into their first obstacle. There's a rhino right there. Let's go back because it's too risky going through this heavy grass. Let's get in the open. There's another rhino. - Now we have two rhinos. - Let's get in here. Okay. The guard throws a ball of mud to one side of the rhinos, moving the animals on without harming them. - We're okay. It's gone. - Okay. What about the other one? Let's go, quick. With the rhinos now a safe distance away, the crew focus on the best spots to position their camera traps. I love that tunnel, the effect. Over 100 scaffold poles provide the anchor points for these secret cameras. When an animal triggers an infrared beam, the cameras will switch on automatically and start recording. If it works, the remote-control cameras should capture close-up footage without disturbing the animals or putting the crew at risk. Basically, that's about as much like grass as we can make it look. As night falls, the crew head back to base for safety. It's time for the new technology to prove its worth. At dawn, the crew have a whodunnit mystery on their hands. Oh, wow. That's carnage! This looks like elephant, we think? This is scaffold pole they have bent. Look at that. It's a sad day. You win some, you lose some. And this time, the animals have outsmarted us. In fact, check this out. Whoo-hoo. So this is our little army of guards, protecting our trigger box. Do they bite? These ones, they bite? Sting? Whoa! Argh! Ow! The little (BLEEP). While Chadden irons out the bugs, Sandesh has met some grumpy locals. Wild Asian water buffalo have extraordinary senses. Mothers will charge if they feel threatened. The guard carries a gun, in case a warning shot is needed, and with good reason. More people are killed by buffalo than by any other animal in Kaziranga. That'll wake you up in the morning. Many of the park staff have cautionary tales about buffalo. The buffalo caught him here, through his throat and the horn came out through his mouth and flung him before running away. It's a miracle that he's still alive. If the wildlife is unfriendly to humans, it's proving downright hostile to camera traps. Completely ripped out the scaffold poles, they've torn the triggers. While Chadden is convinced it's elephants, the rest of the crew are not so sure. This is huge! It's almost like a human footprint. You can see the front paw, the rear paw. We are now two weeks in and it's very frustrating. I've never actually been anywhere where the animals go after your equipment and destroy it, more than here. It's time for the team to do some detective work. Here is our little security camera. If any animals are coming through and vandalising our main cameras, we hope that they're being caught on these little things. As the crew up their spying efforts, the guards take them to a promising lead. Nothing attracts tigers like a rhino carcass. It's very fresh. It's like from the morning. And it looks like there's a tiger cub, so it should be a tigress with cubs, coming to feed on this rhino carcass. It's pretty cool. Chadden decides to give the camera traps one last chance. If there are tigers around, they might scare away the mystery vandals. Elsewhere in the park, the security cameras are turning up some unexpected results. At nighttime, survived another... Ooh! It's a bear. Wow, that's a very rare sighting. I've never seen a bear in Kaziranga. In all my years, never. - Oh, his fingernails... - Look at his claws, right on the lens. So I thought this was elephant damage. I never thought we'd see a sloth bear doing that. That's amazing. A return to the rhino carcass and the plot thickens. Our transmitter's gone. That's what tigers think of camera traps. Do you think there's a bit over there? Pieces. The security cameras have caught a new culprit. Oh, my goodness, there they are. Ooh! There it's a tigress, see that. It's a tigress. It snarled at the camera trap, look at that. Sure don't like camera traps. Okay. With the technology struggling, Sandesh decides to put himself on the frontline. - It's on. - And now we're ready. Time to get the tiger. He'll have no protection apart from a thin wall of grass, and must hope he's as well-hidden as the local wildlife. Over the next five days, Sandesh plays the role of human camera trap. Eventually, the more hands-on approach pays off. Traditional filming methods and a little bit of patience, have helped reveal the hidden creatures of Kaziranga. But it's good to know there are still wild places where animals like to keep their secrets. I knew it was elephants. Next time, we venture to the newest habitat on Earth, our cities. To reveal the extraordinary ways that animals survive in this man-made world. This is the newest habitat on Earth. It's here that animals have to contend with the greatest change that is happening to the face of our planet. In this decade, the urban environment is predicted to grow by nearly 30%. It may appear hostile to animal life, but for the bold, this is a world of surprising opportunity. Jodhpur, India. (LANGUR CALLS) A gang of bachelor male langurs has come to challenge the resident alpha male. (GROWLS) (CALLS) This alpha rules over a valuable urban territory. (DOGS BARKING IN DISTANCE) But maintaining dominance here is a constant struggle. The bachelors have united to try and overthrow him. (LANGURS GRUNTING) If they win, one of the challengers will take over the alpha's troop of females, and may kill his infants. There are 15 males in this bachelor group. The alpha must evict every single one of them from his territory. He has chased half the bachelors away, but a splinter group has looped back and is harassing his females. (LANGURS SNARLING) (HOOTS) Once again, he has to battle. (LANGURS BARKING) (BARKS) Finally, he manages to expel them all. He returns home victorious, but with a serious wound on his right leg. It's a hard life for him in the city. Keeping the intruders away is a daily challenge. But it's worth it. For these urban territories are probably the best langur territories in the world. They're filled with rich feeding grounds. (BIRDS CAWING) Here in the temple gardens, the langurs have, over centuries, developed a surprising relationship. One that guarantee's them a constantly replenished source of food. (BIRDS CALLING) The people here associate langurs with the Hindu God, Lord Hanuman, and revere them. They're given all the food they can eat. And this high-energy diet has led to a baby boom. Female langurs in this city give birth to twice as many young as their forest counterparts. This mother is so well fed that her rich milk can support something rarely seen in the wild. Twins. And all these babies can create troops that are far larger than those found in the forests nearby. With less time spent looking for food, there is more time for play. (LANGURS SQUEALING) The rewards of living in a city can be huge. The challenge is to find your niche. (SIRENS WAILING) New York City. (HORNS HONKING) This densely built-up landscape is as unnatural as anywhere on Earth. (BRAKES SCREECHING) (BIRDS CALLING) And yet, this wild peregrine falcon looks out onto an ideal habitat. Strange as it may seem, this vastly-altered landscape replicates the conditions in which peregrines evolved. The towering buildings have a multitude of ledges on which falcons can nest, and the high perches that they need to catch the wind. (FALCONS SCREECHING) New York City has the highest density of nesting peregrines anywhere on the planet. Winds striking the sides of the skyscrapers are deflected upwards and can help the birds gain height. And the great areas of concrete roasting in the sun create thermals, so that, with very little effort, the birds can soar over the city. And so many peregrines can live here, because down at street level, there is a lot of potential prey. (PIGEONS CHIRPING) Diving from height, the falcons can reach speeds of over 200 miles an hour. But their prey stay down low and close to the buildings. Too risky. The peregrine pulls out of his stoop. But the effort is not wasted. The falcons need to flush their prey into the open. And Manhattan is surrounded by water. Out here the odds change. And in the peregrine's favour. (CHURCH BELL TOLLING) With abundant prey here all year round, it has taken only 40 years for these falcons to establish themselves here. And now, among skyscrapers, they're more successful than their cousins living in the wilderness. Mumbai, in India, is home to over 20 million people. And there are predators here that, though rarely seen, are rightly feared. Carnivores, lured by the prospect of plentiful unsuspecting prey are on the prowl. (DOG BARKING) - (SNARLING) - A leopard. Every night, under the cover of darkness they come out to hunt. (MUSIC PLAYING OVER SPEAKERS) These are big animals, and they're looking for large prey to satisfy their hunger. To catch more than a glimpse of them and reveal their hunting behaviour, you need night-vision cameras. - (INDISTINCT CHATTER) - (HORNS HONKING IN THE DISTANCE) Leopards have attacked almost 200 people here in the last 25 years. But humans are not their usual prey. These leopards are on the hunt for something else. (INDISTINCT CHATTERING) (SNORTING) Pigs. These leopards prefer to hunt the domestic animals that people have brought to the city in considerable numbers. (SNORTING) The pigs keep their family close. (PIG SQUEALING) (PIGLET SQUEALING) The ceaseless noise of the city plays to their advantage. It conceals their approach. And the leopards are using this cover to hunt all over the city. (PIGS SQUEALING) This is a thriving population. In fact, the highest concentration of leopards in the world is right here. (CHURCH BELLS TOLLING) It's not only the abundance of food that attracts wild animals to cities. They're usually several degrees warmer than the surrounding countryside. And here in Rome, in December, one animal is taking full advantage of this extra heat. And it's leaving it's mark. In a single winter's day, ten tonnes of its droppings rain down on the city. (HORNS HONKING) (SQUEALING) Starlings. In the evening, they come back to the warmth of the city after feeding in the neighbouring countryside. They must return to their roosting trees. But the first to do so are at the highest risk of being caught by birds of prey. So, they wait for others to arrive. There's safety in numbers. As daylight fades, the sky fills with a staggering one million starlings. And then follows one of nature's great spectaculars. (WHOOSHING) How, or indeed why, they perform these marvellous aerobatics, we still do not fully understand. Eventually, en masse, they brave the descent and fill the branches of their favourite trees. On these cold winter nights, the city's extra warmth can mean the difference between life and death. (CHIRPING) A city, of course, can provide not only shelter and abundant food, but glamour. These varied objects have been carefully chosen by a bird for their brightness and their colour. (TWIG SNAPS) This great bowerbird has spent over a decade building this collection of mostly man-made objects. Out on a golf course in Townsville, Australia, he's putting the final touches to his enormous bower, that he hopes will impress a visiting female. He spends two hours each day rearranging his prized objects. "Perhaps that would look a little better over there." But it seems that something is missing. Instead of going into town to collect new objects, he's decided to raid his neighbour's bower. "A clothes peg! Excellent!" "And a shiny toy car." It's a risky game if you get caught. The owner is back. (SCREECHING) There is one bower where the risk is worth it. A particular object has caught his eye. He'll have to wait for the owner to leave. This is his chance. A real treasure. A scarlet heart. "Got it." The stage is now set for female visitors. His luck may be in. The seduction can now begin. (SCREECHES) He's showing off his best goods. "Perhaps a little plastic piping? "Or maybe a bit of coloured string?" But his guest doesn't seem to be paying much attention. "A fork? "Madame?" Nothing seems to be working. Something is just not quite right here. But he still has one trick up his sleeve. (SCREECHES) The scarlet heart. (SCREECHING) (CONTINUES SCREECHING) As a final thrill, he expands the pink crest on the back of his head. The sign of his adulthood. But he's made a mistake. This is not a female but a young male who hasn't yet developed that head crest. And he's making off with the scarlet heart. (HISSING AND SCREECHING) It's not easy finding sex in the city. Raising a family in the city is not easy either. It's spring time in Toronto, and this mother raccoon has exchanged her native treetops for rooftops. (DOG BARKING) Since giving birth two months ago, she's kept her offspring safe and warm inside a chimney. (CHITTERING) Now, her young have outgrown their nursery. This is her first major challenge as a mother. The time has come to move to a new home. She needs to get her youngster to ground level. But instead of an easy climb down a tree, she is faced with a vertical drop, with little to cling onto. (SQUEALING) Her baby's first glimpse of the urban world, from a terrifying 30 feet up. This is the last of her litter to be brought down. Its siblings are already - busy exploring the area. - (CHITTERING) And they have much to learn. (WHIMPERING) This one has fallen into a back alley and is trapped. (CHITTERING) Mother comes to the rescue and demonstrates what must be done. (BABY RACCOON WHIMPERING) (CHITTERING) (BABY RACCOON YELPS) That's the way. Raccoons are opportunists. And they're eager to explore. But they'll have to learn very quickly how to get along in this strange new environment so full of hazards. (DOG BARKING) (WATER SPLASHING) Mother comes to the rescue once more. Urban raccoons are now demonstrably better at problem-solving than their country cousins. When the feeding opportunities are this good, the time spent working out how to get to it is well worth it. The complexity of urban life favours the clever. (HORNS BLARING) (INDISTINCT SHOUTING AND CHATTER) But to compete with humanity during daylight hours, takes more than just intelligence. It takes nerve. One enterprising species of monkey has moved into the city of Jaipur in India. The Rhesus macaque. But how to get a share of all this juicy fruit? Every morning, the troop make the same journey through the urban jungle, just as human commuters do. (HORNS HONKING) Sometimes, inevitably, there are traffic jams. Once they get to the market, trouble begins. (INDISTINCT SHOUTING AND CHATTER) Being both intelligent and brazen is the key to beating human beings on their home turf. (MAN SHOUTING REPELLENTLY) It's daylight robbery. (CRICKETS CHIRPING) There are some animals that most would consider too dangerous to tolerate in the city. Spotted hyenas. (HYENA WHOOPING) They're feared throughout their range. (SNARLS) (HYENAS BARKING AND WHOOPING) In the outskirts of Hara in Ethiopia, two clans are coming face to face to battle over a prized resource. (WHOOPING AND YELPING) There are about 60 hyenas in each clan. And they're well matched. After three hours of posturing back and forth, the losers retreat and the victors head to claim their prize. They have been fighting over access to the city. Once inside the city walls, they head for one place. (CHITTERING) And they know exactly how to get there. (WHINING) (GROWLS) The ancient meat market. The scent of all these carcasses lies heavy in the air. (SNARLING) This tradition goes back over 400 years. The human butchers put out the bones they don't need and these hyenas deal with them. They're the only animals that can. No other here has such powerful bone-crushing jaws. (YELPING AND BARKING) And this relationship between man and beast has now been taken a step further. (MAN HOOTING) Yousuf is calling the hyenas to his house. He and his forefathers, going back five generations, have been feeding the hyenas by hand. The inhabitants of this town believe that hyenas provide another very important service. Eating the bad spirits that haunt the streets. These are wild and ferocious animals, but once within these city walls, they behave in a completely different way. Throughout the rest of Africa, spotted hyenas are feared because they kill livestock, sometimes even children. (CONTINUES HOOTING) They are perhaps the most vilified animal on our planet. However, here in Harar, their relationship with people is entirely peaceful. (CONTINUES HOOTING) They have won the trust of man. Losing its fear of humans has enabled one animal to spread into cities everywhere, and in huge numbers. (PIGEONS CHIRPING) Pigeons are by far the most successful urban bird. (CHURCH BELL TOLLING) Here, in Albi, in the south of France, the pigeons come to the river to bathe. They need to preen their flight feathers, clean off the city dust, and cool themselves down. But death lies in wait. A predator that has taken advantage of the very thing that has led to the pigeon's success... Their lack of fear. As the pigeons bathe, oil from their plumage flows downstream, and is detected. A monstrous Wels catfish. Introduced here just 40 years ago, they have proliferated. Virtually exterminated the local fish stocks... And they've now developed a taste for pigeon. Their eyesight is poor, so they use their barbels to sense the movements of their victims. This is a radical new hunting strategy for what is normally a bottom-dwelling fish. After a thousand years of living in this city, pigeons are now having to learn to avoid a fish. (CHURCH BELL TOLLING) Our cities are always changing. Sometimes very swiftly. And animals must cope with the changes, or disappear. One of the greatest changes in recent times has come from a single invention made less than 140 years ago. Electric light. It has become more and more powerful, filling our streets with light. It's everywhere in the city. It even goes under ground. (HORNS BLARING) The difference between day and night is becoming less and less perceptible. And that has a profound effect on the activities of wildlife. In the wilderness, light triggers all kinds of behaviour. On the night of the full moon, hundreds of tiny hawksbill turtle hatchlings emerge from the safety of their nest deep in the sand. Their instinct is to reach the sea as quickly as possible. And their guide is the light of the full moon reflected on the water. But this young hatchling is confused. It's going in the wrong direction. Bright light is coming from the land. And all these hatchlings are travelling up the beach towards it. (INDISTINCT SHOUTING) Predators are ready to take advantage. Crabs now make their burrows directly beneath the beach lights and wait for their prey to come to them. Even if a hatchling escapes, they're still in peril. (VEHICLES PASSING) The lights become more and more bewildering. 80% of all hatchlings on this beach are now disorientated by the lights of the town. Roads bring many to their end. Hundreds get trapped in storm drains every night. Exhausted by the effort of travelling such a distance on land, this hatchling's chances of surviving the night are slim. This turtle is one of the countless species that have been unable to adapt to the change brought about by the urban environment. Only a small number of animals have managed to find ways of living alongside us. And every 10 years, an area the size of Britain disappears under a jungle of concrete. But it doesn't have to be like this. Could it not be possible to build cities more in harmony with nature? How, and whether we decide to invite the wildlife back, is up to us. This tree is rising nearly 30 storeys. It's one of almost 800 being planted to create a vertical forest in Milan. This number of living trees would normally fill two hectares of woodland, but here, they occupy one-tenth of that area. Greening the walls and roofs of our buildings could create a rich and extensive habitat, if we wanted it to do so. There is one city where that idea is being applied on a major scale. Singapore. Two million trees have been planted here in the last 45 years. (BIRDS CHIRPING) This city is now richer in species than any other in the world. And this practise extends to all parts of the city. The waterways have been cleaned up, and smooth-coated otters are coming back. But perhaps, the most spectacular example of city greening is this grove of super trees. These 150 feet high metal structures are now full of life. Creepers have been planted to grow over the outermost branches. This is a new urban world that we have now designed and built with others in mind. Create the space, and the animals will come. Is this a vision of our cities of the future? It could be possible to see wildlife thriving within our cities across the planet. We, after all, are the architects of the urban world. Now, over half of us live in an urban environment. My home, too, is here in the city of London. Looking down on this great metropolis, the ingenuity with which we continue to reshape the surface of our planet is very striking, but it's also sobering. It reminds me of just how easy it is for us to lose our connection with the natural world. Yet it's on this connection that the future of both humanity and the natural world will depend. It's surely our responsibility to do everything within our power to create a planet that provides a home not just for us, but for all life on Earth. For a wildlife film crew, working in the urban environment was an altogether different experience. Two crews set off on two very different missions. It's Mark and Louis's first time in India. Passed this moped, and we're not stopping. We're going. Oh, my God! Yeah, we're in India. Along with the rest of the team, they hope to film up close and personal with the monkeys that have come from the wild to live in the hustle and bustle of the city. I can't believe these macaques have left the peace and quiet for this mayhem, but they're fine here. In fact, they're probably a bit more comfortable than I am with this noise. - (CAR HORN HONKING) - Yeah, yeah. And to get into the monkey's world, Mark will be using a new rig that stabilises the camera and allows him to get right into the action. I think Mark and Louis have got a big challenge. To be, uh, wielding thousands of pounds worth of camera equipment down at the street level. (LAUGHS) Rather them than me. - On your left. I'm more used to a jungle, if I'm honest. Erm, well, this is a jungle all of its own. Just with people instead of trees. (LAUGHING) This really... It's impossible. Seven hundred miles south, in Mumbai, cameraman Gordon Buchanan will have to take on a completely different filming approach if he is to capture an urban leopard hunt. (GOAT BLEATING) It's amazing to think that standing here, surrounded by people, all this, kind of, human activity, that within half a mile, maybe even less, there will be leopards. Only glimpses of these cats have been caught on camera, and just to locate them, he'll need new infrared camera traps. Are you happy with the composition? Good. What about you? Correct shutter speed? (LAUGHING) Gordon is hoping that these camera traps will reveal where they're on the prowl. For the monkey team, finding the animals seems easy... Rob, Rob, Rob. ...but keeping up with them is a different matter. - He almost stomped on that. - Ooh! They didn't put that on the hazard assessment. - A cow in the groin? - (LAUGHS) They're not frightened of us. They're, erm... I mean, look at this. (PIG SQUEALS) He's takin' on pigs, he's takin' on goats, he's takin' on cows. He's takin' on me anytime he wants to. But with monkeys this brazen, Mark is able to follow the troop at street level. (MACAQUES SCREECHING) To capture their movements in their rooftop world, they need to run a cable between buildings and fly a camera along it. And that calls for some inventive rigging. I've got this soft satsuma here, and I've got to lob it to the team on the other side, over there. We're gonna lob it from rooftop to rooftop. We've made sure there's no one on the rooftops and it's safe to do it. You ready? Okay. Okay, good. That's good. I got it into the courtyard. So that's perfect. I think our cable run at the moment is about 60 metres. And we can travel the whole length, while panning and tilting and really looking at everything we want to. It should give us some really dynamic stunning shots. The team is getting an insight at all levels into the monkeys' mischievous lives. (MONKEY SHRIEKING) And are starting to figure out the routes they use to cross the city. And over the course of weeks, the macaques become all too familiar with the crew. All right, little monkey. All right. They're now fully embedded in the troop, and Mark is able to film right amongst them. We've got monkeys behaving naturally. It's fantastic.  Back in Mumbai, the camera traps are revealing where the leopards are coming out. But to stand any chance of capturing them hunting in the city, Gordon will need to use the latest thermal camera technology. (DRUMMING AND TRUMPETING) (FIRE CRACKER EXPLODES) (WHISPERING) I can't imagine that a leopard's gonna come with all this going on. Relative silence eventually descends. Okay, I picked up some movement behind some bushes on the camera. Just a, sort of, a twinkling of light. It's something warm-blooded. Here we go. A leopard. You dancer, look at that. It definitely knows that I'm here. That's the type of sighting that you'd have to wait for weeks and weeks to get a leopard that close, and so airily open. Over the next month, this camera enables Gordon to see into the darkness, and be the first person to film an urban leopard hunt. But it's only at the end of the trip that he has his most memorable encounter. He's coming up. He's coming up. He's coming up. My goodness! Look at that. He's about three metres in front of me. Hey, there! (SMACKS LIPS) My heart is racing. That was close. That's the closest I've ever been to a leopard. It's often the case with urban wildlife is that it's the presence of human beings that allows certain animals to do well. And I suppose it's just incredible that one of those animals is the leopard. It isn't just Gordon getting an insight into the surprising wildlife encounters possible in the city. It's in Jodhpur, filming the langurs, that the monkey team really see the extraordinary relationship between humans and animals in Indian cities. They're so tolerant. They're amazing. And it makes a strong impression on them. Oh, it's beautiful! Yeah, that is beautiful. I mean, this phenomenal connection with incredible creatures, and that just feels wonderful. It was a surprising revelation that it was in cities where the film crews had some of their most extraordinary encounters with wild animals. In this series, I have travelled the length and breadth of the Great Barrier Reef and used the latest techniques to watch its wildlife. But the reef has one more story to tell. The residents of this marine paradise have seen their habitat change rapidly within the last few decades. And time is running out for them. The Barrier Reef is facing one of the most serious challenges to its continued existence - the effect of human beings. But there is hope. This time, our research vessel, the Alucia, will be taking me to meet teams of scientists who are developing new ways to try and save it. And I'll be going to its deepest parts, where new discoveries are being made that might hold clues to its survival. Nobody has ever dived as deep as this before on the Great Barrier Reef. This is one of the greatest and most important ecosystems on the planet - and what happens here affects us all. So, what does the future hold for this complex wonder? I'm travelling along Australia's north east coast to look at one of the greatest and most splendid natural treasures that the world possesses - a chain of tropical islands and coral reefs that lies between the coast and the open ocean. I will never forget the first time I came here. YOUNGER DAVID 'And what a world this was - beneath me lay an endless landscape of coral, of every conceivable colour and shape. It was unimaginable then to think that we might ever lose the reef. But now, I've returned, and I can see that the reef is changing. In the last 30 years, almost half the coral has disappeared. The greatest concern now is that we might lose the reef altogether. Parts of the Great Barrier Reef still remain a mystery. Its immense size and remote depths make it extremely difficult to explore. But today, exciting new technology has made it possible to survey the entire reef from top to bottom. And that is revealing extraordinary things about the way in which the reef itself has evolved over time. By looking into the reef's past, we may discover something about its future. So, I'm meeting marine geologist Dr Robin Beaman. He is on board the Alucia and shows me some of his remarkable discoveries. This is a depth model of the Great Barrier Reef - of the entire Great Barrier Reef. And there's a whole lot of different tools we use, the main one being multibeam echosounders, so it gives you a scan of the seafloor and we can actually map great areas of the continental shelf. This white part is land? That's right. So, everything that's coloured rainbow colours is under water. By combining computer modelling and deep sea surveying, Beaman has discovered new evidence that the reef has already experienced great changes. As a scientist - as geological scientists - we're trying to understand how the Great Barrier Reef has responded to changes in the past and there are clues there as to what the Great Barrier Reef has done, so if I zoom back, you can see, geologically, it's gone through some dramatic changes. Beaman's scans showed traces of an ancient reef that thrived over the last half million years and is now hidden along the edge of this great drop-off. This earlier reef existed long before the one we know today. It lay up to 70 metres deep and stretched nearly unbroken for more than 500 miles. It's been described as the world's largest fossil. This is what the older Great Barrier Reef looked like. And we call these "drowned reefs" - they're drowned in the sense that the water over them is so deep that the reef no longer grows. These ancient reefs were drowned by dramatic climate changes that caused sea levels to rise. This last happened less than 14,000 years ago. So, water released from the melting icecaps is going to start flooding across here, is it? That's right. The sea level was high enough to actually inundate and cover these old limestone hills and created the Great Barrier Reef that we know today. So, the changes that we're seeing going on now are nothing new, in terms of change. I mean, the Barrier Reef has always been changing. We do find it's quite robust. It has actually reformed, despite these catastrophic changes that have occurred. It's been exposed and flooded at least four times that we know of. To us, it's astounding. This new insight into the ancient history of the reef shows that, given enough time, it can regenerate. It seems that if seawater is clear and warm, simple organisms will eventually evolve that can build limestone homes to protect themselves from the waves and their enemies. But most of these events started long before human beings appeared on Earth and took many thousands of years to complete. We now know the reef has dwindled and recovered many times in its long history, but it also has to withstand a major change every 24 hours, as the tide retreats and comes back. At low tide, the water drains away very quickly, leaving the topmost community of creatures dangerously exposed. Some are washed out with the tide. Others swim to safety. But the coral polyps can't move. Temperatures on the surface of the reef can now reach a scorching 30 degrees centigrade. The exposed corals could easily dry out and be damaged by intense ultraviolet rays. But corals have ways of protecting themselves. When exposed to air, they produce huge amounts of mucus, which keeps them wet and acts like a sunscreen. This remarkable slime actually increases its UV resistance, becoming stronger if the temperatures soar. So, the coral manages to survive for the few hours that it's out of water. But there's one fish that manages to turn this exposure to its advantage. The epaulette shark remains on the reef even when the tide goes out. Of course, with so little water, it doesn't get as much oxygen as it requires normally, but it deals with that possibility by shutting off a part of its brain and so, reducing its oxygen demands. As the retreating tide exposes the topmost branches of the corals, the shark remains in the little pools between them for as long as it can. And then, it sets off to try and find food - shrimps, crabs and small worms that live on the reef. And it does that by exploiting another talent it has. It can, in effect, walk. It may be slow-going, but the little shark manages to make its way between the rocky pools to look for prey that may be imprisoned in them. It has the run of the place, until the tide returns once more to flood the reeftop. So, the inhabitants of the reef, each in its own way, deal with the daily hazards brought by exposure. But there is one catastrophe that can strike each year against which there is no defence. From November onwards, warm, moisture-laden winds from the northwest sweep down across these tropic seas and it's then that cyclones form. They are, in fact, the biggest killers of the reef's corals. But that doesn't mean that the corals are permanently destroyed. Their resilience once more comes apparent. And there's an extraordinary example of that in the most unlikely of places. This is the wreck of the SS Yongala. It was sunk by a cyclone in 1911. It lies 30 metres below the surface on a barren, sandy plain miles away from any natural coral reefs. By the time it was discovered, decades later, it had become an artificial reef and had been colonised by an extraordinary variety of life. It was an oasis in the featureless ocean. But in the century since it sank, the wreck has been hit repeatedly by more cyclones. The waters here are not deep so the turbulence created by a cyclone can reach the sea floor. THUNDERCLAP Cyclones travelling towards the coast can rip up hundreds of miles of coral. Captain Trevor Jackson, who has been diving on this wreck for decades, saw the devastating effects caused in 2011 by a category five cyclone. Cyclone Yahtzee, a massive system, crossed the coast just north of here. The cyclone was so large, it generated waves that exposed the top of the Yongala. THUNDERCLAP There was a lifting action and in the process, this scoured the top of the reef of all marine life. What was once a thriving ecosystem was now an almost bare skeleton. But amazingly, the reef on the Yongala began to repair itself within months. Green algae appeared on the wreck. Barnacles followed, allowing corals to get a grip. And soon, a new community had established itself. One of the things that makes the Yongala so unique is the way it rejuvenates itself after a major weather event. In the course of the last four or five years, about 80% of the reef has re-grown. The story of the Yongala shows that a coral reef can, remarkably, recover from natural disaster. And such recovery can be surprisingly quick when a reef is healthy and in balance. Most of the reef's inhabitants depend on one another for survival. But it is the coral that is the foundation of the reef and it plays a crucial role in many of the relationships. This is the crown-of-thorns starfish. For it, coral is food and it will eat relentlessly if not kept in check. But to other creatures, like the guard crab, coral is home. The crab is prepared to defend its patch from the carnivorous starfish at all costs. The crown-of-thorns, however, is much larger than most other starfish on the reef, so the tiny crab is forced to take a more stealthy approach. Hidden within the coral, it waits for its moment to attack. The starfish has left itself dangerously exposed, but the crab is cautious. When it can, the crab uses its powerful pincers to snip at the starfish's spines and tube-like feet before retreating back into the safety of the coral. The crab has won this battle. But recently, something has changed and the balance has been upset. The number of crown-of-thorns has increased dramatically and they've become a big problem on the reef. To find out more, the Alucia is taking me to a research station in the far north of the reef. It's situated on Lizard Island, where we can observe this problem up close. Lizard is surrounded by some of the most spectacular reefs on the entire barrier. But they are under attack from the coral-eating starfish. And at the island's research station, they've been studying why we might be seeing more of them than we used to. They have an extraordinary ability to suddenly increase vastly in numbers, like a plague. There have been three such plagues since the 1960s and, unfortunately, it seems as though we're in the middle, now, of a fourth. You might think that these plagues are just another natural disaster that the reef has had to withstand, like cyclones. There are reasons to suppose that, in fact, the plagues have been affected by human activity - either through an accumulation of run-off of fertilisers from the land that creates more food for the young starfish, or because we have overfished and so destroyed the natural balance of the reef. The starfish outbreaks have been responsible for over 40% of the coral loss of the last 30 years. It's just one of the huge changes here witnessed by Dr Charlie Veron. In 1972, Charlie was appointed the reef's first full-time coral scientist. He's gone on to become a world authority on coral and has identified a third of the world's known species. He was one of the first scientists to spend time in this underwater world and that was due to a particular piece of technology. What we knew about corals at the beginning of the scuba era was just almost nothing. So, scuba gear must have changed things radically. It changed everything. When you went down the face of a coral reef, you could see how corals fed, how they fought each other, how they reproduced and still, we're only just scratching the surface. Think of all the things that happen in a rainforest, how much we know about it. We haven't got a thousandth part of that information on the coral reef yet. But since Charlie's first discoveries, the reef has altered dramatically. I've been going back to the same spots 10, 20, 30, 40 years ago and every time I go back, I'm sickened by some of the changes I've seen. Sometimes, I go back, I know it's the same spot and I can barely recognise it. Some species have been wiped out in the shallows now. It's already happened. What Charlie had witnessed were the effects of mankind upon the reef. When I myself first visited the Queensland coast almost 60 years ago, it was very different. Since then, like many coastlines around the world, there has been a massive increase in population and an explosion of industry. By 1975, the reef had been declared a National Marine Park. It was the biggest one of its kind in the world. But then, a new threat began to be recognised - not only to the reef, but to the world's oceans - climate change. THUNDERCLAPS There is more carbon dioxide in our atmosphere now than there has been in 800,000 years. Industrialised nations have been burning fossil fuels at an alarming rate. Global warming is slowly heating up our planet and threatens to cause huge problems for us all. Around 30% of the carbon dioxide we produce is absorbed by the ocean. As a result, we're seeing an increase in the temperature and acidity of our seas. Both are killing the inhabitants of the reef. But how quickly is it being damaged? To find out, I'm heading to meet Professor Ove Hoegh-Guldberg He's studying the effects of climate change on coral. Ove is based on Heron Island, near the southern end of the Great Barrier. Heron is a low, sandy island, 50 miles out from the mainland, right on the reef itself so its research station is very well-placed. Here, Ove is carrying out an experiment to see how the reef is going to cope. At the research station here, the experiment we're running is really climate change sped up. Because it's often hard for people to really get their heads around when you talk about global change over decades and what might happen to coral reefs. We have, essentially, in these experiments, sped things up so that you can literally, over a year, see the impacts of what might be occurring over the next hundred. Each of these tanks contains a miniature coral reef with the same species of coral. But each is being subjected to slightly different conditions of temperature and acidity - the two factors that are most likely to alter with climate change. Using these tanks, scientists have shown that increasing acidity restricts hard corals from building their limestone skeletons. And a rise in temperature - a single degree centigrade warmer than normal - can cause corals to become so stressed that they eject the photosynthesising algae that enable them to grow and give some colour. So they bleach, turning ghostly white. If you go back in time, you can see the big swings between ice ages and the warm periods where the Great Barrier Reef disappears and regrows and that's happened numerous times. So, we've always had changes, but we're talking about changes over 10,000 years, in those cases. But we're now seeing is the equivalent in a few decades. And that, of course, is stretching life's capacity to keep up. Organisms, ecosystems are falling behind as the world changes, faster than it has in this enormous amount of time. It's been shown here that a rise of just two degrees centigrade will turn a healthy reef into a decimated one. And such a rise will almost certainly happen in these seas if we continue to do what we are doing. As Ove's tests suggest, this man-made problem has reached the point where it needs a man-made solution. I'm returning to mainland Australia to meet the scientists who are approaching this problem in a radically new way. The Australian Institute of Marine Science, AIMS, is based in northeast Queensland, right on the coast. Here, pioneering research is pushing the boundaries of coral science. Over three million litres of filtered seawater are pumped through these tanks every day. So, it's possible for scientists to study the minute and often very complex changes that can affect coral's health. So, here, they're also conducting research to see whether it might not be possible to devise techniques of restoring damaged reefs back to health. In these tanks, they can simulate the exact conditions of the reef. They've been so successful that remarkably, the corals respond to the same astronomic and seasonal rhythms as those out in the ocean. And that is proving useful for one particular experiment. Corals are usually able to adapt to changing circumstances, given enough time. And that is partly due to the way they reproduce. After the first full moon in October, the great synchronised coral spawning event begins. It's a wonderful, annual rejuvenation. Hundreds of species release sperm and eggs into the ocean. Just as pollen from plants is blown far and wide by the wind, so coral spawn is swept away by the ocean currents. And at the same time, under the same moonlight, the corals will spawn here in the laboratory tanks. Using red light, so as not to disturb the process, scientists wait for the moment of release. And when it finally happens, they move fast to collect the sperm and the eggs. It's their one chance to get all the samples they need for a year's worth of research. But what exactly are they planning to do with them? Here, Dr Madeleine van Oppen has been selectively breeding them, using much the same techniques that we've used to produce crops on land that are resistant to drought and disease. It's the first time that selective breeding has been used in marine conservation. They release their sperm and eggs in bundles and those bundles float to the surface of the tank. We then agitate that to separate the eggs from the sperm. And we use that to set up our specific in vitro processes, basically. In the ocean, there is the potential for different species of coral to breed with each other. So, here, scientists wonder if you might be able to produce a new kind of coral that proves more successful in the changing waters of the reef. The problem that corals are facing now is that the change of the environment is extremely fast - much faster than ever recorded - so we need to help them a little bit in the lab. We need to speed up those natural processes of evolution. Van Oppen's aim is to use selective breeding to produce strains of coral that are able to withstand the worst effects of climate change and to use them to bring life back to worst-affected part of the reef. Maybe in five years or so, we will be allowed to place those corals onto a real reef, a disturbed reef - and test it and these selectively-bred corals will be able to restore that reef faster. And you have to realise, this is really a last resort option. We wouldn't want to do that if the reef is able to restore itself. But is there a chance that the reef, damaged by our activities, could restore itself without our help? Well, we now think that there may be clues in the reef's most distant and mysterious regions. There are still parts of the Great Barrier Reef that are virtually unexplored. But today, we have got remarkable new underwater vessels, like this submersible, that can take us to places where no unprotected human being could possibly go. What they will find down there, nobody knows. But I'm lucky enough to be one of those who's about to go down to find out. At the outer edge of the reef, the continental shelf plunges down over 2,000 metres to the seafloor. The Alucia has brought us over the edge of the drop-off, 90 miles out into the Coral Sea out to Osprey Reef. Here at Osprey, this sheer vertical drop of the seafloor enables us to see corals at a variety of depths. Between 100 and 150 metres down, daylight is reduced to a glimmer. This is the mesophotic zone. Here, a mysterious community of corals is thriving, despite the damage being done to the reef above. The Great Barrier Reef, it's a marvel beyond marvels. It's a million species living in this symbiotic tangle, half of which we don't know. I mean, when you get to mesophotic depths, we know very few of the species down there. It literally is one of the last frontiers of biology, to understand this system. Scientists are now beginning to wonder if these corals might have the potential to restore the damaged parts of the reef. RADIO '..Down about 100 metres... Our state-of-the-art submersible is going to take me to see these deep corals for myself and even bring back a sample. Nadir in position. Are we clear to vent? You are clear to vent, clear to vent. Roger. Venting now. We are descending into the twilight zone. As we drop down the face of the reef, the light begins to dim. At about 100 metres, we enter the mesophotic zone. Mesophotic" literally means middle light". The corals here are beginning to look very different. Despite the apparent lack of light down here, there's still enough for some corals to photosynthesise, just like their relations closer to the surface. And to do that, they've formed these flat, broad plates to collect what little light there is. Mesophotic corals lie mostly out of reach of cyclones and bleaching. So, one of the big questions facing scientists is, could these deeper corals naturally repopulate the damaged reefs above? We've now passed beyond the mesophotic zone. The light begins to disappear completely and the reef changes again. Most of the light that filters down from above comes from the blue end of the spectrum, so the rock surface ahead of me looks very dull. But turn on the lights and it looks very different. Despite their remoteness, these strange relatives of reef-building corals are still part of the great reef system. To understand how they're connected, we need to study them closely. So, this seems an excellent place to collect a sample. But manoeuvring our eight-tonne submersible close to the rock face is a delicate operation. Oh, that's great. The chances are that this could well be a species that no-one has ever seen before. But things don't go quite to plan. Oh, no! We're going to have to go and fetch that. There it is. Oh, terrific! Success! As we descend past the 200 metre mark, the coral finally begins to disappear altogether. Surface, surface, Nadir. My depth now, 300 metres. Over. At this depth, the pressure bearing down on the submersible's sphere is more than 30 times that at the surface. That's an incredible 450 pounds per square inch. Here, there's a sediment that is drifting down from above, cloaking the surface of the reef. That means it's very difficult for any organism to get a hold of the rock, because it's continually being swept down. The sediment itself is the result of the erosion of the coral skeletons from high above, but also from the remains of coral that parrot fish have munched and excreted and it's slowly drifting down here. So, this is so deep, it's almost barren. But not quite. At almost the deepest point of our dive, something pays us a visit. There's a fish to your right, David. On your shoulder. Look at this! It's a deep-water grouper. No-one has ever seen them up close like this, at this depth. It appears to find the sub and its occupants fascinating. And he's big, this boy. He must be four, five feet long - a couple of metres, almost. Hello. Oh, gosh! And why he is down here, what he's looking for - who knows? He's going up. So are we. As we ascend, light and colour returns to the reef around us. Our on-board reef scientist, Professor Justin Marshall, is on hand to retrieve the sample we gathered in the darkness. What do you reckon? Well, it's fantastic. This is one of the deepest samples ever from Osprey Reef. It's wonderful. Will it survive? Will it still live? It will still live and we'll take samples back to the University of Queensland and work on it there. Great. In fact, they think this coral has never been reported in this part of the world before and may be new to science. We are a long way off from having a solution to the threats which now face the Great Barrier Reef. But in these deep water samples and in the scientists' experimental tanks, there is a small glimmer of hope. But time is not on our side - an opinion shared by many of the scientists I've met along the way. Are you fearful for the future of the reef? There will be change, for sure. I mean, we're seeing change within our own human lives' timescales now. And what's your prediction about what it's going to look like in another hundred years? The sea levels will be higher. We want to know - as a scientist, we want to know how the Great Barrier Reef will respond. Whether it has the resilience to bounce back with the future changes to the climate remains to be seen. Here on the Great Barrier Reef, we've lost about 50% of the coral since the early 1980s. Coral provides a habitat for over a million species. This is such a fundamental part of our oceans and the fact that it's going to disappear on our watch, it's incredible. When the Great Barrier Reef starts to go seriously backwards, the next generation is going to say, Why didn't you guys do something about it when you had a chance? And well may they ask that because we're not doing what we should be doing and we're going to pay the price. The Great Barrier Reef is in grave danger. The twin perils brought by climate change and increase in the temperature of the ocean and in its acidity threaten its very existence. If they continue to rise at the present rate, the reefs will be gone within decades. And that would be a global catastrophe. About one quarter of the species of fish in the world spend some part of their lives in the reefs. If the reefs go, the fish will also disappear. And that could affect the livelihood and diet of human communities worldwide. But there's surely another reason why we should protect the reefs. They are among this planet's richest, most complex and most beautiful ecosystems. Do we really care so little about the Earth on which we live that we don't wish to protect one of its greatest wonders from the consequences of our behaviour? For this series, the production team were determined to show the Barrier Reef in a new way, by filming in some of its most remote areas and allowing me to meet some of its more unusual and surprising inhabitants. This took us out onto the top of Heron Island's reef, which is only exposed at low tide. But we had to tread carefully, accompanied by guides, to ensure that we didn't damage any of the coral. Anybody who's coming on here, it's weird at first, but just try and walk on the dead coral - the concrete stuff. We were there to film an elusive creature that feeds in this special habitat when the tide is out - the epaulette shark. There's one with a tail - the first one is there. Just gone. It's gone under there. Professor Gillian Renshaw has been studying these sharks for 20 years. It's very hard to see the epaulettes because they're cryptically coloured and blend in very well with the fingers of coral that are rising out of the reef platform. It's a challenging location, not least because it's only accessible for short periods of time. We've got probably about 40 minutes to get all of the shots that we need, so I shouldn't really be talking to you, we should be getting this. OK, quiet please! Camera's rolling. And action, David. The epaulette shark remains on the reef, even when the tide goes out. Of course, with so little water, it doesn't get as much oxygen as it requires normally, but... Although my piece is done, the team must now film the shark's unique walking behaviour. The water is literally pouring in around the equipment and over our feet. We've got about 10 to 15 minutes to get this sequence finished and get back in the boats before we're literally cut off and we can't get back to the boats. The tide creeps in around us. He's walking beautifully, now. Look at that. Let's try and get it in the water a bit. Really nice performance from the epaulette shark. Now, it's a race against time to get off the reef. Are we ready for the boat, now? Geraldine, can we get David on, please? Yeah, looked stunning. Worth the stress. This trip took us from the very top of the reef down almost to its bottom for our most ambitious sequence of the series - to attempt the deepest dive in this area and collect a sample of the mysterious coral that survives there. And it's down to cameraman Paul Williams to film our mission single-handedly. I'm on my own down there. I've gone over it and over it again in my mind, about what we're trying to do and how we're going to do it, so I think I've got it locked in. I hope haven't forgotten anything. It's something of a squeeze in the sub, with all of Paul's filming equipment. Do you mind if I just give you that for a moment? But our third crew member is essential. He's the pilot, Buck Taylor. I'm sitting with a big camera on my shoulder and two other cameras, which were outside the sub, controlled by laptops which were both on my lap. The sound kit was under Buck's feet. It was tight in there. David, do you mind? Would you get your towel and just give that a little wipe there? Yup. Thank you, sir. For the first part of the dive, underwater cameramen filmed the sub's descent. But at about 60 metres, they reached their limit. It's only possible to venture further within the protection of the submarine. As we enter the mesophotic zone, around 100 metres down, we're on our own. To get the best shots of the reef beyond, Paul requires all of Buck's skill as a pilot. Do you want to try some other light options? What have you got? I can give you that. Yeah, put the higher ones on, take the lower ones off. How's that? Yes. Actually, that looks better. Isn't it lovely? Probably full of nooks and crannies. Yeah. Buck, the sub driver, was brilliant. He'd find a drift in the currents and then we'd just drift across the coral. What's nice is, I can actually see the wall. That's a very good angle for me. Is it? Yeah. So, just let us drift a tiny bit to starboard. And...action, David. This wall of rock ahead of me is actually the flank of Osprey Reef - an oasis for life. But we weren't down here just to look. We also wanted to collect samples for deep reef scientists and that proved easier said than done. Oh, no! We have to go and fetch that. We'll take that on film. As we descended beyond 250 metres, we entered a landscape rarely seen with the naked eye. It was the perfect opportunity simply to explore. This is the first time that manned submersibles have worked at this depth and it gives one the ability to look and observe and just do curiosity-driven research. It's fantastic. The visibility down here spectacular, isn't it? It's absolutely pure, yeah. There were many times when I had to take my eye away from the eyepiece because I just had to look with my own eyes, so it goes into the brain properly in the right perspective. Soon, we reached our target depth. There it is. 300. Nobody before has ever been as deep as this on the Great Barrier Reef. I like it. LAUGHTER So, it hasn't even come up on here - 290 metres, but we've heard that they've just reached 300 metres. Another thing to add to the things that David's done on this planet. The purpose of our record-breaking trip was to raise awareness of the reef's fragility. Fortunately, while production continued on the series, the dive caught the attention of a president. Mr President. When I heard that you had gone down, you dove into the Great Barrier Reef again 60 years after the first time you did it? Yes. That impressed me. Ah, but I was in a sub. I mean, I was in a very, very remarkable research sub and we went down to over 300 metres. Oh, so you went really deep. And that was just mind-blowing. The deep dive proved a truly memorable moment for me and allowed us the unique opportunity of revealing a part of this great reef that has never before been seen. (MUSIC Piano playing) Music, of some kind or other for so many of us, is a very important part of life. It certainly is for me. It's rousing, it's calming, it's thrilling. It's endlessly fascinating. But equally fascinating for me is the connection between the sounds that we make and the apparently musical sounds that some animals make. ls there, in fact, a trail of clues if only we could unearth it, that leads from, say, a humpback whale to Jimi Hendrix? From the songs of birds to the cantatas of Johann Sebastian Bach? This is a search for the origins of human music. It will lead us from some of the most beautiful music and animal sounds of today, back to the dawn of our species. And we start with the skylark. (MUSIC Vaughan Williams The Lark Ascending) And the music of Vaughan Williams. The Lark Ascending. When Vaughan Williams composed this, he was clearly trying to translate the lark's song into human musical terms and so evoke a mood. Many people would argue that a general inspiration can be the only real link between human music and animal sounds. But maybe that's not so. Scientists are now beginning to ask whether there is a connection that goes much, much deeper. So, rather than just being a cultural phenomenon, is music part of our fundamental human nature, with perhaps some of the biological functions as choruses and songs have for some animals that make them? Animals make an extraordinary variety of sounds. (Wolves howl) But do any of them share anything fundamental with our own musical compositions? The howling of wolves certainly has an unearthly beauty. But sounds can be beautiful without being musical. Human music is far more structured and complex than these howls. So beauty alone is not enough of a clue. (Bats squeak) The high-pitched calls of bats are certainly complex. Lowered in pitch so that we can hear them, they can sound musical. The bats use them as a kind of acoustic torch. A glint of sound reflected by a fluttering wing, and the bat has its prey. But music is most definitely not a way of seeing in the dark. So complexity alone is not enough of a clue, either. (Rumbling purr) Down at the bottom end of the sound spectrum, elephants make rumbles deeper than any church organ. Some, indeed, are below the range of the human ear. They make a great variety of higher-pitched sounds, too. (Rasping) At dawn and dusk, when still, cool air traps sound close to the ground, their rumbling calls can be heard over enormous distances. Such sounds as these, we know help to coordinate the movements and lives of an elephant community. Each sound seems to have a particular meaning. Elephant calls, in fact, are more like straightforward signals than music. Dolphins are probably the most acoustically sophisticated animals. But as far as we know they still use their sounds either as a way of echolocation, like bats, or as a part of a sizeable vocabulary of signals, like those sounds made by elephants. Despite the complexity and often the beauty of these different animal sounds, there's nothing to link them to music. So, what sort of characteristics should we be looking for? What does music have that all these sounds lack? Well, for a start music from any human culture has to be listened to as a whole. A single note has no meaning in itself. But put notes together and musical phrases begin to emerge. (MUSIC Jazz violin and vibraphone) Phrases can be connected to make melodies. And melodies become themes. Themes evolve through variations and all may be combined according to particular rules. Those are the basic elements of our music. And there's one animal that uses all those elements and more to produce what is undoubtedly the most complex and longest song we know about. I've come here to the Dominican Republic in the Caribbean to hear it for myself. It is, of course, the humpback whale. One of the first people to suggest that humpback whale song might be truly musical was Katy Payne of Cornell University. She took me to listen to whales here in Samana Bay where they congregate each winter from all over the Atlantic Ocean. Why would whales pick this particular patch of sea? I suppose because it's warm. These whales come from the North Atlantic. They're coming here to bear their calves and take care of them in the first months. Also to breed again and to sing. Singing, that's what I'm keen on. How can I hear them singing? You have to put a microphone in the water. That we can do, but perhaps a little farther out where the males who are the singers, are most likely to be. Our search for any whales, let alone a singer, was a long one. There was supposed to be something like 200 humpbacks in Samana Bay, but they weren't coming up anywhere near us. Finally, Katy caught sight of the telltale blows. They're down at the moment but can come up on either side. There's one! (Payne) Yes, I think there are three or four. At least one will be a male. He's probably an escort to another which is a female. And if we will leave them alone and put down our hydrophone, he may calm down, go under and begin to sing. (Whale song) Some people maintain that these sounds are the origins of myths about the sirens of the sea and their seductive songs, when old-time sailors heard whale cries resonating through the wooden hulls of their ships. Our approach to listening to humpback song was rather more high-tech. Are these astonishing sounds truly musical? Could they give us an insight into the biological origin of our own music? (Whale song) We must be very close to one. - Really? - Yes. - Is that just one whale? - Yes, you can tell by the rhythm. (Droning song) All one, long phrase. (Long moan) - Did you hear that before? - Now we're repeating. Now we're in a long, long theme. - Let's see if it repeats. - (Long moan) Remember? As we eavesdropped on oursinger, Katygave me a lesson in the structure of humpback song, Right? Heard it before? All the whales in the bay sing the same song, made up of five or so themes sung in strict sequence, A whale may repeat each theme as many times as he likes but then he must always move on to the next one in the cycle, You could write similar rules for the structure of a symphony or a jazz improvisation, (Whale song) So you're saying that this is all one, long song. Oh, this is just a tiny fragment so far of a song that could last half an hour. And how long would he go on singing that song? Well, he might cycle around once he gets to the "end". My word. Begin again, for as much as 24 hours. (Crackling) - We've hit the bottom. - We better pull her up a bit. I'd had my doubts about whether a whale song was really musical but now Katy and the whale were convincing me. But the song's musical quality only emerges if, like Katy, you listen over the years, because, slowly, in a logical musical way, whale song evolves. (Payne) Let me sing you an example. (Low coo) (Growls) (Grunts) And the ocean was full of that. All theme five sounded like that. Two years later, it was different. And yet it was derived and it appeared in relation to the other themes of the song. And it went... (High coo) (Purrs) (Grunts) So, you predict. What's it gonna do next? Does your mind work like a whale's mind? Add another one, does he? A grunt at the bottom? About two years later, he'd added four more grunts. And by the beginning of the next season, there were 13 grunts. (Whale grunts) (Attenborough) Music! (Payne) Yeah! I know, it's musical. It's composition. It's innovation. And, of course, we wonder why. If we knew why and if we accept that their song is musical, then we might get some clue about the original function of human music. Let's look at another group of animals that might shed light on that question of why? Birds. I've come here to fight a duel. My chosen weapon is a territorial song and my opponent is just over there. It's a great tit. During the winter, this bird established a territory in which he and his mate will rear a family. But now he has to defend that territory against rivals. Song is his first line of defence. And it's also the weapon used by any male that's trying to invade his territory. Which, of course, is what I'm doing. And I've armed myself with the recording of a song. I'll give him a first salvo. (Musical chirping) As he listens to my recorded challenge, he's able to judge my physical fitness and strength. Singing is a good indication of that because it takes a lot of physical effort for a little bird to sing with vigour. He should now sing back. I'll try him again. (Chirping) And there's his response. His message is simple. I'm a great tit and this is my patch. But if he sings it with enough vigour, it also amounts to saying, I'm so strong that you would never win if we came to blows. The winner of a contest like this is the one who demonstrates his superior fitness by singing the longest. This little chap is clearly not going to give up, so I'll beat a retreat. A bird's territorial song is simple, like its message. But as spring advances, the sounds in the woodland change. The birds are now singing songs that are far more elaborate than is needed for territorial defence alone. These males are not just singing to each other. Now they are also singing to females. And that's when musical complexity really takes off. This superb lyrebird from Australia has one of the most complex songs of any bird. He continually adds elements to it and will incorporate just about anything he hears just to demonstrate how accomplished he is. A kookaburra. (Whistles) - A car alarm. - (Mimics) Even a logger's chainsaw. (Chainsaw buzzes) So why should a simple territorial cheep be elaborated into something as complex as this? There's a visual parallel to be found in a bird's feathers that explains that. The peacock's tail is the visual equivalent of a complex song. And it evolved to delight the eye of the peahen. (Squawking) In the distant past, the male peafowl had a short and simple tail, much like this juvenile's. But the females happened to develop a preference for males with slightly longer, more decorative tails. Their male offspring inherited those longer tails and their female offspring inherited a stronger liking for them. They were choosing mates, in fact, for aesthetic rather than practical reasons. Over generations, the results snowball and now peacocks have the biggest and most beautiful tails on the planet. In just the same way, this process of sexual selection can, over generations, change a simple signal into a song of great complexity. But are females attracted to the song because of its beauty alone? Or because it reveals something practical about the quality of the male as a mate? To find the answer to that I paddled out to the reed beds on Lake Kvismaren in Sweden. This is where Dennis Hasselquist and his colleagues from the University of Lund have been studying the song of the great reed warbler. It's all males that you hear singing around us here. So, immediately, when they arrive here in early May, they start to sing this loud, intensive, long song. They don't seem to take any notice of us. No, at this time of year, they are pumped with testosterone. Theyjust sit high in the reed and sing 20 hours per day. You can hear each little burst of song is made up of 10-15 different syllables, different sounds. I don't think I can hear that, actually. No, it's pretty hard for us to distinguish. But we know that these great reed warbler females are very good at distinguishing syllables. So they always mate with males with the largest number of syllables in their song. So this is the sort of beauty that a female great reed warbler is drawn to, And the best way for a human listener to appreciate it is to record the song and to play it back slowed down, Just as with notes in human music there's no meaning in an individual syllable, (Slowed-down chirping) But put together and listened to as a whole they can win a great reed warbler a mate. I can clearly hear the different syllables. How many do you need to count as a really good song? A bad singer, they only use about 25 different syllables. But a really good singer, he can have a much higher complexity in the song. They can sing up to 45 different syllables. So why is a female drawn to a male that can sing 45 syllables rather than to one who can only sing, say, a mere 40? She can hardly have the strength of her offspring consciously in her mind. She just prefers more trills. But Dennis Hasselquist and his team, after 15 years of intensive research, have discovered that, in practice, the offspring of the best singers are the best survivors. And by choosing a male with the most complex song, the female is ensuring that her offspring will have the best genes to succeed. So, a male's song is, in effect, a musical window on his genes. That is extraordinary. Now, off you go. So, does our understanding of the territorial song of the great tit and the mate-attracting song of the great reed warbler help to explain the complex musical song of the humpback whale? Everything these whales do is on a grand scale and their song is no exception. (Payne) I think they are just the birds of the sea. On a huge scale, the birds. The song travels large distances. 100 miles for the lowest part of the calls. Probably working out to help males maintain floating territories, protect mates that they are claiming for their own. The high frequencies in all their variety perhaps attracting... females who like variety. And why should they change from year to year? You know, we don't really know. But it certainly seems to be functioning or working the same way fashion works in humans. Attracting females by the virtue of its very innovation. So, "this is the song for the year and I'm the boy to be with"? This is the song for the month or the song for the week. You're the boy to be with if you're singing the right one! (Laughter) Complexity to attract a mate and simplicity to claim territory. Sex and territory are, it seems, inextricably linked in the greatest animal song on Earth. So, if whales sing for good, practical reasons, did human music also originally have similar practical functions? There are so many different styles of human music around the world it's hard to believe that they could all share the same biological explanation. But the fact that every single human culture has some sort of music suggests that you really can't be human without it. And if we are all doing it, maybe we are all stimulated to do so by the vestiges of some ancient biological prompting. If that were true, you would expect humans to have been making music since our species began. And the search for evidence of that leads way underground. In some caves visited by our Stone Age ancestors, there are drumming marks on the stalactites which suggest that they were played like xylophones. There are also marks painted onto the cave walls that seem to indicate areas where sounds are particularly effective. Were our ancestors singing there? Were they playing instruments? The best evidence we have comes from a handful of reed pipes 30-40,000 years old. Graeme Lawson, an archaeologist from Cambridge University, led me into the world of Stone Age music. Here we are. This is the kind of space in which we find the instruments. From one cave in the south of France we have a series of 24 separate finds. And I don't just mean sticks that you hit together, I'm talking about pipes with finger holes. Several finger holes, which were capable of playing musical melody, perhaps as we would now know it. Here's a facsimile of one of these pipes. The original was made of vulture wing bone. I brought along a reed of a material that would've been readily available at the time, and you get a sound something like this. (Reedy drone) Well, that's actually lovely. But I suppose the strange thing about it is that it is both extremely modern but also timeless. One of the fascinating things about looking at these instruments is how sophisticated they are, when you consider that these are the first evidence that we have for music concrete evidence for music in the world. If that's 35,000 years old and fairly sophisticated, when do you think the traditions started, how long back? Well, my guess is that we are looking at the tip of a historical iceberg, which probably stretches back, for pipes with finger holes, say, 50-60-70,000 years. As to other kinds of music-making, singing, stamping, dancing, movement, rhythmic percussion, that's a long way back. So we're talking about the very roots of our species, even before homo sapiens. It may well be, and may well be that music was one of those things which made us what we are. (MUSIC Pipes and percussion) The fact that music exists in every human culture, and seems to have done so since prehistory, suggests that it did at least start out with a fundamental biological role. So, what was it? The trail of clues leads high into the Bolivian Andes. For the Macha people, music is as important a part of life as their llamas. Each year, throughout the region, villagers rehearse and prepare songs for a huge festival, the Tinku. In May, they converge on the town of Macha. But this is no light-hearted concert. Neither is it a competition to decide the best song. This is musical war. A group from each village blasts their opponents with volleys of song. They taunt one another with music and dance. And, as if to emphasise the seriousness of this musical conflict and to demonstrate to the other side that they haven't gone soft, the Tinku traditionally escalates into physical violence. The inevitable injuries, sometimes even fatalities with the police trying to control the skirmishes with tear gas, are all part of this traditional musical battle. It's a battle without winners but one prime social purpose. A musical reinforcement of territorial boundaries. (Yells) Such traditional territorial displays still appear in all sorts of contemporary activities. The intimidating haka of New Zealand's national rugby team started out as a Maori war dance. You see such territorial song displays at sports grounds all round the world on and off the pitch.  Rule, Britannia  Britannia rules the waves...  National anthems and patriotic music have the same function.  Rule, Britannia....  They're a way of proclaiming national identity and of drawing a line between your social group and those outside it.  Rule Britannia...  And that line doesn't have to be a geographical one.  Britons never, never, never shall be slaves  Fashions in pop music that, together with dress, change markedly and deliberately over the years, draw lines between generations and social groups.  Wanna be yourself...  Don't wanna be a slave...  But music that marks out these social or geographical boundaries not only sends messages to outsiders, it also creates bonds within the group.  Adieu mon pays...  Singing may not be what soldiers of the Foreign Legion are best known for, but it is, in fact a central part of their training. They are taught to sing specifically to bond the group and create loyalty. And here's a key difference between these human territorial songs and the songs of the birds and the whales. Whereas they sing as individuals, human beings do it in groups. ls that a part of our biological prehistory too? In the jungles of Sumatra lives an animal that might provide the answer to that, and much more. - Is that them? - Yeah. Coming down the trunk. There it goes. Yeah! With one swing of the arm. It's the siamang gibbon, Bjrn Merker is studying it because he believes this primate relation of ours, more than any other animal, might hold the key to the origin of human music, (Merker) Siamang song, unlike other gibbons, is not melodious, but contains highly rhythmic phrases. They sing together with different parts for the male and female. The song builds up to a crescendo, which is the female great call, and at close range, it is a deafening and incredibly impressive spectacle. When I met him Bjrn had been using his transparent sound reflectors and microphones to map out the singing territories, He'd also perfected a remarkable imitation, (Hoots) It's one simple, barked phrase. Yes, and was that male or female? - This was a male. - Give me the female. (Rhythmic screeching) (Howls) Appetite whetted, we headed into the forest to record the real thing from as close as we could get. (Merker) What we have here is the most magnificent siamang habitat I've been in. There are about six family groups, defending their territories by singing. We could hear them singing in the distance but if we set off after a family in full song, they would probably have finished by the time we reached them, Our best chance was to find a family that hadn't yet begun their daily performance, The branches about 20-30 yards ahead of us are swaying and shaking. They're certainly in there. So, if we're patient and wait for a bit, there's a good chance we might hear them singing. - (Hoot) - And there is the first bark. - From a female? - Yes. And we should be hearing booms. Here come the booms. - (Hooting) - Yes. Yes. (Merker) That's the male. The song was impressively loud, It was easy to see that this could give a good indication of a group's strength, This is building up nicely. But you can't perfect a coordinated recital like this without a lot of practice, And both animals are doing this. See their mouths moving? So, performing it regularly does two things, It strengthens the bonds within a family and advertises the family's strength to the neighbours, just like the singing foreign Legionnaires, Here comes the great call. This is the female alone. - (Rhythmic hooting) - Wow! Now she's gonna start accelerating. (Accelerates) There comes the male, bi-tonal. And now all hell will break loose. (Massed hooting) Whoa! Siamang gibbons perform their song as a family because it's the family that holds the territory, On the other hand, our ancestors according to some scientists, held their territories as male groups, as chimpanzees do today, That, says Bjrn, is how human group singing mighthave begun, (Merker) I personally happen to believe that we ourselves were singing apes, maybe something like these animals in the trees here before we became talking humans. In that case, broadcasting a vocal signal to the neighbours outside the territory, the territorial rivals and potential encroachers, would obviously serve a function. - So this was a family defence. - Yes. But you see the human singing ape, as it were... behaving as a group much bigger than a family. (Merker) Much bigger than this. And they probably sang to scare the living daylights out of their neighbours. I have a hunch that they might have. (Gibbons hoot) But coordinating a large group of singers requires one further element. And that is rhythm. (Rhythmic chanting) This is the Balinese kecak a re-enactment of a Hindu myth, danced to the rhythmic chant of men imitating the calls of monkeys. No other species can do this. Humans are unique in their ability to sing to a rhythmic beat. (Rhythmic chanting) And once you can sing together, you can move together. And that is the basis of the archetypal war dance. This is probably the closest thing that you can see today to the rhythmic territorial display of our distant ancestors - a war dance on the Sumatran island of Nias. It's a display of fitness and strength, like a bird's territorial song, and a show of group coordination and solidarity like the siamang gibbon's. (Singing in Chechen) On the other side of the world, in the middle of all-too-contemporary war, these Chechnyan men perform a rhythmic song and dance that asserts their strength and unity and national identity. It's musically simple but like the great tit's song, there is no need for it to be complex to make its territorial point. So the origins of rhythm, and indeed the origins of all human music, may have connections with territory. But what about sex? (Singing) These men, Wodaabe nomads in West Africa are preparing for a festival of singing, dancing and display. The Wodaabe women will choose a man to mate with by the quality of his performance. Music is just one part of this but it does look as if the whole ritual has been elaborated like the peacock's tail, as a consequence of female choice. This woman is discreetly signalling her decision. It's this man. Whichever sex is doing the choosing, you see the same thing at clubs and parties all over the world. It's hard to imagine an event like this without music. (Classical music) Even Western classical music although not overtly sexual, has its own allure. (Woman) "My dear, I cannot close my eyes to sleep till I've returned you 10,000 thanks for the inexpressible delight I have received from your ever-enchanting compositions and your incomparably charming performance of them. This love letter was written to Josef Haydn, then in his late fifties, by an English admirer. He dedicated this piano trio to her. (MUSIC Piano) Oh, how earnestly I wish to see you. My dearest, I cannot be happy till I know. Do tell me when you will come. Most faithfully and affectionately yours, Rebecca. In a biography written at the time, Haydn is quoted as saying that he couldn't understand how, in his life he had been loved by so many pretty women. They can't have been led to it by my beauty," he said. Not his beauty, perhaps, but his music. (MUSIC Wild Thing) In the last half-century, Western pop music has put the link with sex centre-stage.  Wild thing  You make my heart sing...  In the best tradition of sex, drugs and rock'n'roll, male pop musicians are renowned for their many liaisons with female fans. There seems no doubt that music did for Jimi Hendrix what whale song does for a humpback.  Come on and sock it to me one time  Whoo!  (Latin percussion) So, like the music made by animals, human music can be about territory and about sex. And you can see them both in the Carnaval in Rio. While neighbourhood bands compete in a military kind of way, the dancing is overwhelmingly sexual. Maybe human music started out as a simple territorial display and then mate choice acted as it did on bird and whale song, to add virtuosity and complexity, so that now sex and territory are inextricably linked in performances like this. We can never be certain in exact detail of just how territorial and mate-attracting song evolved amongst our earliest ancestors. Music, sadly, doesn't fossilise. And even the very earliest instruments that we find can't tell us how the music they produced was being used. But there seems very little doubt that music did have its biological origins in those two functions and that even today, consciously or subconsciously, it can serve those two purposes. But surely sex and territory can't be the explanation of all our music. (Choral singing) What about the music we use at weddings and funerals? What about film music? Opera? Or music like this, written by Bach in joyful praise of his God? The biological connection here is very hard to see. Unless, that is you turn from the performers to look at the reactions of the audience. All this types of music are written to stir the emotions of the listeners. But why is music so extraordinarily good at stirring our emotions? The answer may lie once again in biology and in the effect that birdsong, gibbon song and whale song has on those animals when they hear it. (Payne) I often wonder what it's like for whales to hear their own songs, how they experience those songs. Being an animal myself, I'd be astonished if the whales are counting the number of grunts at the end of the phrase, and saying, "This one is new, therefore I'll go for this male. It seems to me much more likely that the song is entering the whale as a whole and somehow charging the whale up with emotional feelings that increase the desire either to fight or to mate. (Merker) If indeed we sang before we talked all of this would apply to us as well. And we would have ready-made in our nature the emotional equipment to respond to these vocal signals. And after that, all you need to get to what we call real human music is, of course, to elaborate it. (Attenborough) In other words, what human societies everywhere have done is to take music's biological ability to arouse basic emotions and elaborate that. From nursery rhymes onwards, we are taught the different nuances of the emotional meaning in the music of our cultures, giving musicians access to a whole palette of emotional colours. That is why Bach can write emotional praise of his God and why Vaughan Williams's Lark Ascending does more than imitate the skylark. It raises the human spirits to the sky as well. And all of these have their origins in the same biological roots as the songs of animals. (Birdsong) So perhaps it's here, in the way we respond to music through feelings and emotions, that we share the most with the birds the gibbons and the whales. So now, when I listen to a pop concert, or play the piano, hear birdsong, or drop in to the sound world of the whale with these insights into what human music and animal music share I shall be listening with new and open ears. (Whale song) (Woman sings) (Pipe plays) (Violin plays) On one day every year in the city of London, you can encounter some extraordinary wildlife. Hundreds of gorillas are roaming the streets. You wouldn't catch me running in one of these gorilla suits but nonetheless, the Great Gorilla Run does raise... great sums of money to help protect mountain gorillas in Central Africa. Wow! I met the real mountain gorillas over a quarter of a century ago in Africa and it's something I shall never, ever forget. At the time, they were on the verge of extinction. But since then, their numbers have increased despite all odds and they've become a conservation success story. How is it that mountain gorillas have been able to triumph over adversity? That's what this programme is going to try and examine. GORILLAS GRUNT Fewer than 90,000 gorillas are left in the world and they live in the tropical forests of equatorial Africa, split into western and eastern species. The future of all gorillas is uncertain. They're threatened by loss of habitat and hunting, by disease and political instability. But surprisingly, mountain gorillas, a sub species of eastern gorilla, have been increasing despite facing these same threats. That remarkable success is the subject of this story. Some 700 mountain gorillas live in the wild today and for 380 of them home is in the Virunga Volcanoes, where the borders of Rwanda, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo all meet. While those numbers may seem small, back in 1978 there were even fewer. That's when I got the chance of a lifetime to film them for the BBC series Life On Earth. Spending time with these rare creatures was an unforgettable experience. HE WHISPERS There is more meaning and mutual understanding in exchanging a glance... with a gorilla than any other animal I know. We see the world in the same way that they do. They walk around on the ground as we do, though they're immensely more powerful than we are. And so if ever there was a possibility of escaping the human condition and living imaginatively in another creature's world... it must be with the gorilla. That intimate encounter not only moved me, it had a great effect on viewers everywhere. Mountain gorillas became iconic animals that people cared about. In order to understand how that happened, we need to examine their troubled relationship with humanity. The story begins over a century ago. In 1861, Paul du Chaillu claimed to be the first white explorer to see the terrifying man-ape of Africa in the wild. He described the encounter in this book, Explorations and Adventures in Equatorial Africa. This is how he describes the gorilla. His eyes began to flash fierce a fire as we stood motionless on the defensive and the crest of short hair which stands on his forehead began to twitch rapidly up and down while his powerful fangs were shown as he again sent forth a thunderous roar. And now truly he reminded me of nothing but some hellish dream creature, a being of that hideous order - half-man, half-beast. Just as he began another of his roars, beating his breast in rage, we fired and killed him. GUN SHOT These terrifying tales inspired other explorers who wanted to see this half-man, half-beast for themselves and to take specimens home as trophies. Thousands of western lowland gorillas were killed for private collections. Some were taken alive and those that survived transportation were then sentenced to a life in captivity. Mountain gorillas were not discovered by European explorers until 1902. A German, Captain Robert von Beringe, was travelling in the Virunga Mountains when he came across two of them and shot them for scientific examination. The mountain gorilla was named after him, Gorilla beringei In 1921, the taxidermist Carl Akeley from the American Museum of Natural History joined the gorilla rush. He traveled to the Virungas to film and collect mountain Gorilla specimens, and he killed five of them. But Carl Akeley's triumph was short-lived. In his autobiography, he describes the shame he felt as he looked at the animal he had just killed. As he lay at the base of the tree, it took all one's scientific ardour to keep from feeling like a murderer. He was a magnificent creature with the face of an amiable giant who would do no harm, except perhaps in self-defence, or in defence of his friends. Inspired by a new respect for gorillas, Carl Akeley persuaded the King of Belgium to declare the home of the mountain gorilla a national park. So, on April 25th 1925, the Virunga Volcanoes became Africa's first national park. The first step towards saving mountain gorillas had been taken But very little was known about the ecology, behaviour and population of mountain gorillas until zoologists began detailed field studies. A census in 1960 estimated that there were only 450 of them in the Virungas. By 1967, when the American Dian Fossey came here to study the gorillas, that estimate had decreased dramatically to just 275. On her arrival, Dian set up the Karisoke Research Centre and began what was to become the longest and most detailed study of gorillas so far. Dian hardly seemed to be an ideal candidate for the job. She was not a zoologist. She had wanted to become a vet but failed her exams and became an occupational therapist instead. She suffered from emphysema and a fear of heights, not ideal when working in thin air on high mountains. But her love of animals and her strong will made up for her lack of expertise. It soon became clear to Dian that the mountain gorillas were in trouble. They were threatened not only by loss of habitat but by poachers. The National Park that had been created to protect them was failing to do so. Dian would not only have the task of studying these animals, but she'd have to try and save them from extinction She spent most of her time with one particular group and that was the one that we were to film for the BBC series Life On Earth. Recently, those of us who were on that trip got together to compare notes on just what happened. not surprisingly perhaps after this long time our memories didn't always exactly coincide. the director in charge of that particular program was John Sparks I wrote the script and clearly if you're talking about the evolution of humanity  the opposable thumb, and the forefinger giving the grip And I wrote in my script (original script) I wrote it with chimpanzee's and you said, why don't we do gorillas? and I said because thats silly! Gorillas? I've always been fascinated by primates anyway, and I wanted to see mountain Gorillas So this is how these things evolve you see? I thought John's plan was rather over ambitious Mountain Gorillas live 3000 meters high up in the Virunga volcanoes and are notoriously difficult to approach getting to them would mean carrying all our film equipment up 45 degree slopes through thick jungle most problematic of them all there was no way that we would be able to film them without the help of Dian Fossey the only person in the world who was studying them in the wild I'd heard of Dian Fossey and from what I had heard I couldn't believe that Dian would allow a television crew coming in and I said you'll never get it And you wrote, and I know you wrote a persuasive letter or something I have to say it surprised us all that she wrote back a very nice letter saying you're welcome! and we immediately made plans to launch an exhibition there a few weeks later we were on our way to the Virungas but things didn't turn out as expected. Our guide, we knew, would be a researcher who'd been working as Dian's assistant for over a year - a young Yorkshire man named Ian Redmond. When we arrived, the first person we met, and you said, I have got terrible news. One, Dian is very ill. But two, which is as important, that she is being destroyed with sorrow because her favourite gorilla has just been murdered. The victim was Digit, a young male gorilla for whom Dian had a special affection He had been killed eight days before we arrived, on New Year's Eve 1977. He was 12 years old and had already gained the silver colouring of a mature male That meant that, as a young silverback, he was expected to act as bodyguard for the family. Eight days earlier, poachers managed to get into the park. They were setting snares for antelope but they were also after gorillas. Determined to protect his family, Digit would have fought any intruder. But his bravery was no defence against the poacher's spears. Having killed him, they cut off his head and his hands in order to sell them for a few dollars as souvenirs. I had the, at that time, the worst experience in my life... finding the body of someone I'd known for over a year. It was also clear that there'd been a frenzy of violence because his body was covered with cuts and they'd obviously just been in a blood-lust. They took his head and his hands and they left the rest of the body because people in Rwanda don't eat Gorillas it's not a part of Africa where gorilla meat is favoured - so they had no use for the body and he was killed because foreigners were buying bits for souvenirs. Then I had to go and find Dian. We sat and talked right through to dawn, actually. I felt Digit should become a martyr, that his death should be used to try and prevent other deaths. Dian was very worried that if we successfully raised a lot of money off Digit's death, other gorillas would be killed to raise more money. She did in the end agree to use digits death as a tool to raise awareness and raise funds to  do what she called active conservation Which is patrols out protecting the Gorillas in the forest. It seemed the worst possible time to try and visit Dian and ask if we could make a natural history sequence for a television program If we had put a foot wrong, If we had said something that suggested that we would not treat the Gorillas with proper respect she would have had no hesitation to saying Get Out! But when we arrived, Dian decided that our filming trip could help publicise the plight of the gorillas and agreed that our filming could go ahead as planned She gave Martin Saunders special instructions on how to go about the job. I think we were very much on trial, the first day we went with them. We certainly were. I remember being told, Don't look them in the face, don't stare them in the eyes and don't stand up and crawl through the vegetation and grunt. I mean, when Dickie and me saw them first, we started grunting, boy! We were grunting and we'd no intention of standing up, that's for sure. The first few of us saw the silverback great swirl of vegetation and this huge animal disappearing into the undergrowth and our first encounter was seeing palm trees being snapped off hearing very powerful animals and we were just about to approach them there was a little frisson of fear. Well maybe they're our kind of real King Kongs we were all astonished to discover just how gentle these giants really were. when they were undisturbed. I must say as a cameraman, I was very surprised. I did not expect to get as close to the gorillas as we got. This was the gift that Dian gave the world. Yes. The technique of winning the trust of completely wild gorillas. I mean it is quite difficult to keep your distance its not as if you go to them as they come to you once your accepted you become irrelevant I had a problem because one adult male saw a reflection in front of the camera thought it was another Gorilla, came out in front, and stuck his arm round me. it was impossible to film it One of the great moments of the filming actually Martin to see this Gorilla fingering the back of your head trying to see who it was It was entirely thanks to Dian Fossey that we were able to get so close to the gorillas After years of gaining their confidence, she had habituated them to her presence and they allowed her to sit alongside them without any concern. Puck has become very curious about my still camera. By the 1970s, Dian's television reports and articles had made her famous worldwide. And through her, people had come to know her gorillas as individuals with names and personalities. I'm always amused by three-year-old Pablo's pout, which is unusual for gorillas. Dian knew little Pablo particularly well. He was always hanging around her, intrigued by what she was up to. It was the same confident Pablo who chose to lie on me during the Life On Earth filming. David what was your recollection of this moment? Oh I suppose bliss really, - you look quite happy - where you grimacing? I was grimacing because he was pulling my legs One of them is pulling my foot the baby Gorilla started taking off my shoe well you can't talk about the opposable thumb and the importance in primate evolution of the grip if someone is taking off your shoe particularly if that somebody is two baby Gorillas (TALK TOGETHER) And so actually the notions of primate evolution and technicalities of digital grips vanished, and I just sort of lay there having this extraordinary experience This was one of the amazing moments of that filming expedition where, I had the expectation of getting David with a few Gorillas in the background and then to suddenly find he was surrounded by Gorillas with youngsters up ending on him and sticking their bottoms in his face and biting his knee, unbelievable That was certainly one of the most unforgettable moments of my career in making natural history films. It was a marvellous, blissful moment. Dian loved her gorillas as she might have loved her own children. The killing of Digit, her favourite, was a terrible blow for her. Furthermore, she had been severely ill for some time. She had a chest infection and was spitting blood. It was in this physical and emotional state that Dian asked for our help. She was in a frenzy of grief, wasn't she, really? It was only on our last night there, when we had filmed and got this remarkable footage, she invited me to her cabin and we talked for, I don't know, an hour or so in which she said, You must promise me that you will go back and you will organise fund-raising. And I gave her that promise. so we set off on the return journey to Kigali the Rwandan capital but there was further trouble ahead We came down off the mountain, to meet a truck in a field we all got in this truck I remember, I sat in front with the driver and we turned round this corner and there was some khaki clad Africans in the road and the driver said bandits! and put his foot down, and we charged through these John, David and Dicky were on the back of the truck when I suddenly heard these bullets winging over the head and it was then it dawned on us that it was actually it wasn't bandits it was actually the army. That had been sent to arrest us because we seem to have been caught in the middle of some kind of in fight about making an anti-Rwandese publicity film about the way the weren't looking after their natural resources after Digit was killed. It was an alarming situation Ian had stayed on the mountain with Dian and we didn't know who was who.. but you don't argue with people carrying loaded rifles. I was hauled off the back and taken away to be strip searched and you said to me don't worry I've changed the labels on the cans. Dicky bird and myself were on the truck and I said Dicky, if they confiscate this film we've been up that mountain for nothing. We jumped into a taxi and went straight to the airport we got onto our plane, and when  I saw the runway disappear behind us, I thought Thank God! We now had to continue with the rest of the filming for life on earth elsewhere in Africa. Back in Rwanda Dian was spending less time on scientific research and more on her war against the poachers. She established the first effective anti-poaching patrols in the Virungas. Patrols which eventually joined forces with government rangers and continue to this day. When they caught poachers they brought them back to Dian for questioning and only then handed them over to the authorities but Dian was also known to have more controversial methods for deterring poachers there were stories of her attempting to terrify them using halloween masks, and even kidnapping their children but she realised that if she didn't take extreme action fast there would be no Gorillas left. It wasn't just poachers that Dian had to worry about. The gorillas' forest home, on which they depended, was rapidly disappearing. It had already been reduced to a tiny island of forest in the middle of an immense sea of humanity. Now the increasing human population was threatening the little patch of forest that was left. It was being cleared to make way for fields in which to grow pyrethrum, a kind of chrysanthemum that had suddenly become very valuable as an eco-friendly alternative to the insecticide DDT, which was poisoning so much wildlife in Europe. So, paradoxically, protecting European eagles was now threatening African apes. When the European community sponsored the Rwandan government to remove 40% of the park to grow pyrethrum so that we had this biodegradable insecticide for our crops, they were actually going to take that limit up to the 10,000ft mark. Dian told me she saw the plans and it was coming up to Karisoke, right up to the research centre would have been fields. She fought that, in her inimitable way, undoubtedly pounding tables and dominating people and got the limit of the park redrawn at the 8,500ft level. And if she hadn't done that, Dian was single handedly battling to save the Gorillas despite her ill health if there was ever a time when she needed outside help it was now Back in Britain, the life on earth series was broadcast on television it was a great success and eventually seen by 500 million people worldwide the Gorilla episode was arguably the most popular sequence of all and many people began to feel they wanted to help in the struggle to save these beautiful creatures. I hadn't forgotten my promise to Dian to help raise funds for mountain gorilla conservation. When I came back, we got you and Sandy Harcourt and Kelly Stewart and the Fauna and Flora International, and we set up the Mountain Gorilla Project there and then, which started to raise money and eventually raised a lot of money. And continues in a new guise to this day. Yeah. Bill Weber was one of the key players responsible for implementing the Mountain Gorilla Project in Rwanda. When he began, more than half the people told him they thought the area should be cleared for agriculture. Convincing the local people of the value of gorilla conservation wasn't going to be easy. The Mountain Gorilla Project started officially in the summer of 1979 and had three main components. One was to improve park protection and security - hire more guards, train them better. To start an education programme, so that you not only had millions of people around the world who cared about gorillas, but that you had at least thousands of Rwandans who knew and cared about gorillas. What became the linchpin with the Mountain Gorilla project was the tourism program We went to the park service and said, You can make a lot more money off of tourism, if you set up a programme that has gorilla-based tourism at its heart. The term ecotourism didn't exist at the time, but it really was a prototype of that. There's just nothing quite like being in and among mountain gorillas. People will pay whatever's asked in Rwanda. Mountain gorillas are exceedingly tolerant of a human presence, they just seem to almost love But the Mountain Gorilla Project faced opposition from two sources. First, the Ministry of Agriculture with European funding was about to take another one third of the park, 5,000 hectares, for a cattle-raising project. and they are a very strong Ministry, and the park service was not very strong Surprisingly, the second source of opposition to the Mountain Gorilla Project was Dian Fossey herself. I thought she would welcome the support and the funds, but she didn't feel that the education projects were a priority and saw gorilla tourism as more of a hindrance than a help. Dian believed that the gorillas ought to be protected for their own values. I think that's a noble sentiment, but it wasn't working. While she was here, the gorilla population had been nearly halved, 40% of the park had been cleared. We felt you needed an alternative and that's what the Mountain Gorilla Project offered. I think, although it was portrayed as an opposite point of view - Dian, active conservation, versus the Mountain Gorilla Project and its long-term view - both were right. You can't have one without the other, but in terms of priorities, if you've got 1,000, what do you spend it on? Education for the next generation while gorillas die today? Or patrols that protect the gorillas now and then try to find some more money for the future education? I think Dian's contribution as a conservationist is fairly limited. She came to study the gorillas. She was forced into protecting them, she did some things that she thought would help. I don't think they were effective, some of were counter-productive. I think it required people with a different vision and a different approach to make conservation work in this park and for the gorillas. I believed we were supporting exactly the same mission as Dian, we just used different techniques. Although Dian Fossey has many critics, she certainly succeeded in stimulating worldwide interest in mountain gorillas and their plight. All too easily the Mountain Gorilla may become extinct. That's something we cannot afford to forget. Dian's fame led to a best-selling book, "Gorillas In The Mist", which was published in 1983. Her story sparked an interest in Hollywood and production started on a feature film about her life. It was a tragedy that, just as the world was becoming concerned about mountain gorillas and international efforts were uniting to halt their decline, Dian was no longer there to witness the progress. She died on the night of December 26th 1985. Her death was not natural. An American naturalist working in the Central African state of Rwanda has been found murdered. The body of Miss Dian Fossey was discovered at the Karisoke Research Institute, which she founded herself. No details were given about how she met her death or who her killers were. Ian Redmond was back in England when he heard the terrible news. I travelled out to Rwanda. We went up to her cabin, she had just been buried. I'd missed the funeral but her blood stains were still on the carpet. There was a chunk where a machete had hit her bedside table and Dian's hair was caught in a splinter. It was the scene of the crime. But we don't know who did it and the murder's never been solved. She was standing in the way of certain individuals making money. Whether because they were making money through bush meat, or someone's aspirations to turn Karisoke into a tourist camp and make a lot of money that way. If you stand in the way of someone who is ruthless, who wants to make a lot of money, then it's not that surprising that she was killed. Dian Fossey's grave now lies alongside those of her gorilla friends. She spent 19 years researching and campaigning passionately, on behalf of the gorillas, and ultimately gave her life for them. As her gravestone says, No-one loved gorillas more." all of us absolutely recognise that if it wasn't for Dian, then mountain gorillas probably wouldn't be there at all now I think her short term measures, which some people see as politically incorrect or inappropriate, or not the best way forward where what held the ground until the more thoughtful and better planned long term measures were put in place She was a fantastic role model for millions of people and inspired millions of people I believe she deserves a better reputation in science than she has Dian started what is less glamorous but is essential to have long term monitoring of populations and we now have life histories of individuals, families, changes in groups births, deaths, infidelities all of this for gorillas ever since the late 1960's and thats a great contribution Dian had been murdered but the feature film about her life still went ahead Sigourney Weaver played her character in gorillas in the mist to mark the 20th anniversary of the death of Dian Fossey Sigourney Weaver returned to Rwanda to pay her respects and find out how Dian's legacy continues to help the mountain gorillas Playing Dian, I think gave me such an experience of how much of a difference one individual can make I'd never played anyone real before, and I was so moved by the fact that here was this person who came all by herself who'd never been to Africa and started researching the mountain gorillas and really started this whole movement not just to study them, but also to rescue them from what was certain extinction and I think its a very inspiring story and I appreciate it even more now than I did when I was playing her how courageous she had to be and how determined and how much she must have loved these animals The movie Gorillas In the Mist was not only a huge box-office success, it also persuaded millions worldwide to care about mountain gorillas. Sigourney Weaver herself became determined to do whatever she could to help. Since 1987, she's been campaigning to save them as the Honorary Chair of the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund International. Public support for gorilla conservation and tourism increased following the movie, and mountain gorillas became the latest must-see animal. In the '80s and early '90s, their population steadily grew to about 320 individuals and their future was looking promising. But this period of stability and growth was about to come to a sudden end. The countries which, between them, share the mountain gorillas - Rwanda, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo, formerly Zaire - have a history of political turmoil. When civil war broke out in Rwanda, caused by rivalries between extremist Hutus and Tutsis, gorilla tourism came to an abrupt halt and the future of the animals became very uncertain. At the start of the war, both sides, realising the gorillas economic value, issued assurances that they would not be killed. But when the war escalated to horrific levels, no-one was safe. In 1994 a million people were killed in 100 days of genocidal slaughter The staff involved in gorilla research and conservation were forced to flee and several died. The region became the scene of the worst humanitarian crisis since the Second World War. There were two million refugees at camps bordering the park and the forest was plundered for firewood and bush meat. In August 1994, only days after the war had come to an end, Ian Redmond and Dieter Steklis, from the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund International, went back to Rwanda. Their plan was to rescue the park staff who'd been forced to flee and were now in refugee camps in Zaire. They were also anxious to find out how the gorillas had been affected by the war. Their hazardous journey was filmed by the BBC for a nature special. We drove down from Uganda, crossed the border not knowing through the roadblocks, past the bodies in the ditches... It was a country that stank of death. Every one of my Rwandan friends had lost a member of their family, some of them most of their family. That really was an awful period. It was obvious the surrounding area was being stripped of its forest, of its wood, and you can't blame the people. It's cold and wet - they need to cook food and keep warm. But in just trying to survive, they were destroying the surrounding forest. We knew that hungry people would be buying bush meat and if we didn't get some sort of protection in there quickly, then the park would be awash with snares and hunters killing antelope and buffalo, even if they weren't targeting gorillas. So we wanted to get the conservation work restarted before the poachers got organized and they would be quick off the mark. After days of searching, Ian Redmond and Dieter Steklis finally tracked down some of the park's staff. It was critical that they were brought back to the park quickly to prevent the widespread killing of gorillas. The knowledge that's in the heads of trackers and guides and rangers is what the future of those gorillas depend on. And so looking after our friends and getting them back to work was one thing. as being kind of an alien environment, hostile, felt actually like walking back into the garden of Eden. It was wonderful - this oppression lifted and we were back with the smells and the sounds of the forest. We got up to the research centre and found the buildings had been trashed, possessions had been stolen or destroyed and it was a mess, but there were still cabins there then. It was heartbreaking for Ian and Dieter. The research centre was in ruins but their biggest concern was whether any of the park's gorillas had been killed. We had somewhere to stay and we went out the next day to find one of the gorilla groups. Ian was filled with apprehension as he hiked in search of the gorillas. And there they were, going about their business in the forest. It was wonderful to see them. To his great relief, he had been able to locate and identify more and more of his gorilla friends, one by one. Over the years of unrest, more than 20 had disappeared but that was far fewer than most people had expected. It may well be that most of the gorillas were able to flee and so had avoided the crossfire. But now they were back, and Ian and Dieter were able to reinstate park staff and restart patrols by guards before poachers were able to resume their hunting. The gorillas were now protected once again. The feeling at this stage was just one of enormous relief to find that Pablo's group as well as Titus's were basically intact But they survived the worst of the war and seem to be ok It was very much the feeling that, the gorillas really had a lesson for us we humans should perhaps take a lesson out of their book and stop killing our neighbours and, our friends and concentrate on the important things in life like eating, playing and making babies It seemed like a good omen, that we got there and were able to protect them again and its extraordinary how in only 10 years Rwanda has repaired itself, healed itself yes of course there are still conflicts, of course there are still more people trying to get over the terrible things that have happened but it is very much a feeling is of a country that is pulling itself together and moving forward and what is wonderful in terms of the gorilla story is that the gorillas are right in the centre of that progressive look forward Ian's nature special was screened on new years day 1995. viewers were reassured that the mountain gorillas had survived the war with minimum casualties. In the following years, tourism began to increase again as security in the region improved. By the year 2000, there were 360 mountain gorillas. The next BBC Primate series Cousins, broadcast the same year, showed viewers that the mountain gorillas were indeed thriving. Primatologist Dr Charlotte Uhlenbroek went to Rwanda to film with the gorillas. The highlight of the whole trip, of course, was meeting this newborn baby gorilla. We were so lucky. It was literally the night before we arrived, we heard the news that a baby gorilla had been born. And it was such a fantastic sign of hope, I felt, because Rwanda had been devastated by war and, against all odds, the gorillas had survived - they continued their lives in the forest and here was this new arrival, a new generation. Such an optimistic sign for the future of those mountain gorillas, I felt. The fact that this baby had been born to a mother who had not only survived the war, but had lost a hand and a foot in poachers' snares was a cause for great celebration. It was very touching because the park rangers got together and decided they wanted to name the gorilla Bibisi, after our film crew. It was a real honour. So when we got down from the mountain that day, we cracked open some beers and wet the baby's head, metaphorically, of course! that we had a very, very special connection with this baby. The birth of baby Bibisi was a source of optimism, but the threats to gorillas had not gone away. GUNSHOTS On 9th May 2002, gunshots were heard in the park. Two adult female gorillas, Impanga and Muraha, were found dead. Muraha's infant was still clinging to her mother's dead body. But Impanga's infant, baby Bibisi, was missing. It was absolutely devastating when we got the news that Bibisi had actually been kidnapped and Impanga, her mother, had been killed. To this day, we don't know what happened to baby Bibisi. Very, very few mountain gorillas make it, especially when they're ripped from their mother's arms at the age of two. Just the trauma of that experience alone is enough to kill them. I think it's highly unlikely that she would have made it, which is desperately sad. The capture of baby Bibisi was not a one-off case. Baby gorillas are still being snatched from the wild, despite the fact that the commercial trade in all apes is prohibited by the Convention on the International Trade of Endangered Species. One baby mountain gorilla that was recently stolen was rescued and is being kept near the Rwandan park headquarters. This is three-year-old Maisha. Park staff were tipped off that she was being offered for sale and rescued her from where she was being secretly kept. Chris Whittier, a vet from the Mountain Gorilla Veterinary Project, is responsible for her care. The police and the Parks Authorities did an undercover operation and managed to find where she was and arrested a number of poachers. Up until that time, she'd been in a cave inside of a sack, so it was pretty horrible conditions. By the time Maisha was rescued, she was very traumatized. It's likely that she would have witnessed the murder of some of her family, as poachers would almost certainly have had to kill them in order to steal their baby. Caring for mountain gorillas in captivity is not easy. Few survive. But the vets here are specialists in gorilla medicine and are doing everything they can to ensure her survival. Maisha is currently the only captive Mountain gorilla in the world. An orphan, she needs 24-hour care and attention. She's evaluated periodically to look at her social adjustment and how confident she is, and those sort of things. is that she's doing well, she's come a long way, but that she needs a little bit more time still to really get to a normal behavioural level of a gorilla her age. The team caring for Maisha have a moral dilemma. It seems wrong to keep her in captivity longer than absolutely necessary, but releasing her into the wild is very risky. She could be rejected by other gorilla groups, injured or even killed. Our hope is that she will get back into the wild and become a healthy individual, contribute to the population. That's easier said than done. Every gorilla is precious. Their populations are still so low that the loss of a single one could be critical. But the mountain gorilla's fame will help its survival. A gorilla kidnap today is a concern nationally and internationally. Thanks to the economic value of gorilla tourism, these animals are now recognised as one of the region's most valuable assets. And the local community stands to benefit directly from the gorillas, as the government has pledged to give them 5% of the park fees. Mountain gorillas are very, very important to the Rwandan economy and to the Rwandan people. Now, for us, it is an identity. Say, "Rwanda" then say, "Gorillas. They are the flagship of tourism in Rwanda, now tourism is placed as number three, as one of the major foreign exchange earners. Also, when you come specifically here to the Virunga, it's helping us in conservation. We could not have saved this habitat if there were no gorillas there. It's no surprise to me that gorilla tourism is so popular. Spending time with gorillas is an experience like no other. And they are as interested in us as we are in them. Ian has his own theories on why this is so. I think they're intrigued by how little our canine teeth are. Is that right? I think that... Genuinely so? Yeah, I think they... Apart from the fact we haven't got a beard and big black head? Yeah, you look and smell like an adult male. And we smell the same as them, especially sweating through the undergrowth! When we're with them... It all suddenly came back to me, sort of visions of school, because I thought, This smells like a rugby changing room after a hot sweaty, match. Without liniment! Yes. You are constantly being reminded that they're your close relations because they behave in ways and react in ways which are very reminiscent of humans. The problem is that it's almost too much because if you're not careful, you identify too much and you interpret too much in your own terms and you probably get it wrong. But visitors are no longer allowed to get as close as I was to Pablo back in 1978. The fact that we are so genetically similar to gorillas, sharing 98% of the same genes, means that gorillas can catch our diseases. That's why it's so important that human visitors must be in good health, and that they keep to a distance of seven metres. Visits are also limited to just one hour to reduce our impact on the animals. Staff from the Mountain Gorilla Veterinary Project and the National Park monitor the health of the gorillas in the Virunga Mountains every day. Gorillas can be prone to respiratory illnesses, but the vets only intervene if an illness or injury is potentially life-threatening. Treatment can be disruptive for both the people and the gorillas. Prevention is better than cure and eliminating disease here, in both humans and animals, is of the greatest importance. The fact that people live and work so close to the edge of the park, increases the risk of the spread of disease from humans to gorillas and vice versa. To improve the health of the human community, organizations like the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund International are supporting clinics surrounding the park, providing medicine and education. The hope is that the health of the people and the gorillas will improve as a result and that the local community will feel that they themselves are benefiting from gorilla conservation. Protecting the gorillas' habitat, preventing poaching and the transmission of disease, providing them with veterinary care and giving them a real earning power through tourism, has resulted in a significant increase in the gorillas' numbers. So the future of mountain gorillas is looking hopeful. But the prospect for eastern and western lowland gorillas is much more bleak. There are fewer than 90,000 of them left in the world and their numbers are declining rapidly, as a result of deforestation, hunting and diseases such as Ebola. Little of their habitat is protected and the areas in which they live are affected by civil war, lawlessness and extreme poverty. Gorillas are not the only endangered great ape. Orang-utans, chimpanzees and bonobos all face similar threats and if we don't act now, they will become extinct in our children's lifetime. We're going to need serious commitment at the highest levels, if we're to save the world's remaining great apes. The first big step has already been taken. In September 2005, an international meeting was brokered by the United Nations in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Countries and organisations were encouraged to sign up to the Kinshasa Agreement to save great apes from extinction. Ian Redmond believes this is a positive step forward. have now been knitted into a global strategy. Instead of individual little heroic efforts going on here and here, winning the odd battle but losing the war, we now have a chance to actually strategically take on the threats to the great apes and that's very exciting. The declaration requires its signatories to reduce practices that are wiping out great apes and enforce laws to protect them. It is evident from this week's proceedings that strong international co-operation will be forthcoming to assure the long-term survival of the great apes. The political will is encouraging but the goal of securing the future of great apes in the wild by 2015 will only be realized if all parties fulfil their promises. It was after returning from the historic meeting in Kinshasa that Ian showed us some recent footage of the mountain gorillas that we'd first met in Rwanda over 25 years ago. Oh, dear. I would be... DAVID SIGHS ..withdrawing and doing all the submissive gestures I can think of! Grunting like mad. Yes! This looks like Titus now. Is that Titus? Yeah. Is it?! The last time we'd seen Titus, he was a lively, inquisitive youngster, but we were in for more of a shock, for when we saw what had become of young Pablo. Here he is, sitting on me in 1978. And here he is today - a 200 kilo dominant silverback, king of his group. So that's Pablo. That's Pablo? That was sitting on your foot. The one sitting on my feet? Yes. Good job he's not sitting on your feet now. Quite, yes. And Pablo is the leader now of the biggest group of gorillas on record with 59 individuals. 59?! Yes. I mean, they're rewriting the gorilla sociology books. It's great news that Pablo's group has grown to record-breaking size. In fact, the total number of mountain gorillas in the Virungas has increased by 120 individuals in the last 25 years to a high, at the last count, of 380. It is now our responsibility to learn lessons from the mountain gorilla conservation story and help all the other great apes that are still so seriously endangered. There's a long way to go but we too can play our part in helping to save the great apes. Thanks to individuals like these, to conservation organisations, to communities, to governments, there really is hope for the mountain gorilla and the other great apes. But we continue to destroy so much of the natural world that danger is ever present. The time really has come to show our closest cousins that we do care. SPECTATORS CHEER I'm here, surrounded by one of nature's greatest wonders. A living structure so enormous, it can be seen from space. The Great Barrier Reef. Home to one of the most extraordinary communities of animals on the planet. I've been fascinated by it for almost 60 years. Here, unknown species are still being found. And scientists are making astonishing discoveries about the creatures that we thought we knew. In this series, our research vessel, the Alucia, will allow us to explore the reef as never before. Using the latest technology, I'll visit its mysterious depths. Nobody has ever dived as deep as this before on the Great Barrier Reef. I'll learn of its surprising origins. And discover how this wonderfully diverse community has been created by some of the very smallest creatures on the reef. But visited by some of the most impressive animals on the planet. It's an ecosystem like no other. Vital to our oceans. And surprisingly, we are still uncovering its many secrets. The Great Barrier Reef lies on Australia's north-east coast. It's 1,400 miles long and at its widest, 150 miles across. It consists of almost 3,000 individual coral reefs and 900 islands. And for me, it's truly one of the most extraordinary places on the planet. People say to me, What was the most magical thing you ever saw in your life? What was the most magical moment in your career as a naturalist? And I always say, the first time I put on a mask and went below the surface and moved in three dimensions just with a flick of my fin and suddenly saw all these amazingly multicoloured things living in communities right there. Just astounding things. Unforgettable beauty. I first came to the Barrier Reef nearly 60 years ago. And I remember very clearly how amazed I was to see such a complexity of life. But today, we have ways of looking at the reef, technical ways, which we never had before and give us a completely new vision of this wonderful place, which is surely one of the greatest treasures of the natural world. Now I've returned. And taking me on this journey is the Alucia, a 56-metre state-of-the-art research and exploration vessel. For this expedition, we've been granted unprecedented access to some of the most remote corners of the Great Barrier Reef. Onboard is a team of experts. And at our disposal, all the latest technology. Our mission is to reveal a hidden world and to complete a series of dives that have never before been attempted on the Great Barrier Reef. But to do that, we have had to bring in a very special piece of equipment. This is a Triton submarine. The very latest in submersible technology. And the first of its kind to be brought to these waters. The submersible's captain, Buck Taylor, will lead the dive team. With 2,000 dives under his belt, his expertise is unparalleled. While our film crew rigs the submersible with no fewer than eight cameras, Buck gathers the rest of the team together to brief us on the dives ahead. COMPUTER "Welcome to the MV Alucia submersible team... The submersible offers spectacular filming opportunities, but it's not without its dangers. Coming from the rescue background, I've been in a submersible up to my waist in water, I've had a fire in a submersible. COMPUTER "No smoking, smoking materials... As well as these hazards, Buck is also obliged to raise one of the more intimate limitations of submersible life. We do have facilities of a toilet onboard. Obviously, because it's quite confined, it's not very discrete, so we do have some towels out that we can hold up around you. It's quite interesting trying to explain about going to the toilet in a three-man submersible in a sort of sphere that's less than two metres diameter. It's quite intimate. He was six foot three... LAUGHTER We've got cameras pointing from every direction. Good. Thank you. Thanks very much. I'm looking forward to it a lot. The Alucia's first mission is to take us to the Barrier's stunning ribbon reefs in the north of its extensive range. It's an area of outstanding natural beauty and the perfect place to begin our explorations. The story of the Great Barrier Reef starts with its most important inhabitant, the coral itself. Hidden inside these branching structures are the thousands of tiny creatures that build these reefs. And they have an enormous claim to fame. Together, they've built the largest living structure on earth. But these fascinating coral creatures are only active at night. So to capture their behaviour, we'll need to do something I've never done before. Tonight, a team of specialist divers, scientists and programme-makers, like myself, have gathered together to have a closer look and a longer look at the reef at night than perhaps has ever been possible. When I came here 60 years ago, the idea of a night dive was almost inconceivable. It seemed to me, a beginner, to be far too dangerous. But now, technology is going to help me. Once I'm in, it's over to Buck and the support team, who remain onboard the Alucia, to make sure everything goes smoothly. INDISTINCT RADIO They've spent months preparing for this moment. SIREN WAILS Our submersible, known to the crew as the Nadir, has, of course, made dives like this all over the world. She's descended to the deepest part of the oceans, but she's never visited the Barrier Reef. It's a first for all of us. But before we can go anywhere, we'll need to position the Nadir at a safe distance from the Alucia. It's a substantial operation, but finally, we're ready to get underway. S.O. Nadir, just approaching the buoy. Am I clear to vent? RADIO "Roger, Nadir. You are clear to vent, clear to vent. Have a good dive, guys. Sinking beneath the waves is a very surreal experience. Your first instinct is to hold your breath. At night, the reef is a ghostly world. Tiny shrimp-like creatures dance in the lights. Look at that! Wow! With little light, there is a lot less colour, but this is still a very magical place. Ah! There's something! My first fish! Our submersible will eventually take us to depths of 300 metres. Now, we're only 30 metres down, but that's exciting enough for a start. In these dark waters, Buck needs to be careful as we move around the front of the reef. Coral reefs are sometimes described as marine cities. And the comparison is indeed a good one. We're here to take a closer look at the reef's architecture. Its coral buildings. There are more than 450 different species of hard coral. The plant-like structures we can see are actually made of limestone. And living inside are thousands of highly industrious little animals called coral polyps. At night, the water around the reef becomes filled with clouds of tiny microorganisms called the zooplankton. And that's what the corals eat. The coral polyps themselves emerge from their stony skeleton and start groping in the water with their tentacles. To see just what they're doing, we need specialised cameras. The coral polyps never leave the safety of their limestone homes, even at night. If something edible comes within reach, the polyps fire the microscopic harpoons that line their tentacles. The prey is stunned or killed and then pulled into the polyp's mouth. When you can't leave your home, it pays to be accurate. The coral's stinging armoury isn't used only for collecting food. They also use it to fight. Because, as has been discovered only comparatively recently, corals, like many animals that live on land, are extremely territorial. But in order to see the battles, you have to speed up time. The polyps of each colony collaborate to defend their patch. As in any big city, space is precious. If a rival grows too close, there will be trouble. These fights can last for hours. The competition is fierce as the coral colonies jostle with one another for the best feeding sites. When they're not locked in battle, the corals have work to do. They must extract calcium carbonate from the surrounding seawater and with it, build their homes. Each coral species has its own particular way of building. And together, they eventually create the huge reefs that provide homes for all kinds of other, much larger creatures. At night, the reef seems like an extraterrestrial world. But down here, we are the aliens. And here comes a turtle! Attracted by our lights. Come on! Coming straight to us. Isn't that great! Coming face-to-face with a green turtle in this setting is a rare privilege, but its presence here, along with all the other reef residents, is only made possible thanks to the great coral builders. He doesn't look very upset, does he? It happens all the time on this reef. It's the perfect end to my first dive. The time has come for us to make our way back up to the Alucia. Welcome back, gentlemen. Diving on a reef at night is a thrilling experience. What I want to see next is how exactly these tiny coral creatures have created such a vast and extensive habitat. To answer that, we'll need to look at the reef from another angle entirely. At this height, you can begin to appreciate the immense size of the Barrier Reef. It's 2,300 kilometres long, 1,400 miles. It's the largest living structure on the planet. Reefs much like these develop in the shallow tropical waters that surround many an island and continental coast. But few can match the Great Barrier in either size or complexity. So, what is so special about the north-eastern coast of Australia? A clue to the answer lies in the shape of the sea floor. If we strip away the ocean, we can reveal the reason why such extraordinary growth is possible. The reef has grown on a very shallow continental shelf. Beyond which, there is a sudden and very steep 2,000-metre drop-off. It stands in waters with an average depth of just 35 metres. That's just about as far as sunlight can penetrate with any strength. Light is crucially important to reef-building corals because they have developed a special partnership with microscopic algae - plants that actually grow within tissues. The algae get a safe home and, like all plants, when they photosynthesise, they produce energy. The coral polyps use this energy to construct their limestone home. Together, they've built an underwater city on a scale that is almost impossible to comprehend. But amazingly, just 10,000 years ago, there was no coral here at all. The Great Barrier Reef as we know it today simply didn't exist. How and when these coral communities began is something scientists have only recently started to investigate. Marine geologist, Dr Robin Beaman, has been leading an ambitious project to scan the entire reef. And his data has allowed us to map the sea floor. David, this is a three-dimensional model of the Great Barrier Reef. In deeper waters, we tend to use sonar, in shallow waters, we tend to use underwater laser beams to image the sea floor. By combining computer modelling and radiocarbon dating, his team have been able to reconstruct the key stages in the development of the Great Barrier. Their research has helped identify an event between 10,000 and 20,000 years ago which may explain how the Great Barrier Reef was formed. But surprisingly, scientists are not the only ones to tell this story. Australia's Aboriginal peoples arrived on this continent around 50,000 years ago. They have been telling the story of how the reef was formed long before the world's scientists even knew it existed. To hear that story, the Alucia is taking us to Northern Queensland to meet a community with a very special connection to this underwater world. They are the Gimuy Walubara Yidinji people. And they live just outside the city of Cairns. This community has dwelt alongside the reef for thousands of years. THEY SPEAK YIDINY And many of their traditions hark back to those ancient times. THEY SING IN YIDINY And one of them tells how the reef came into existence. It's a legend that has been passed down from generation to generation in the form of a dance. Tell me the story that's connected to this dance, sir. It's part of our law story that's told to me by my dad, my father, and was told to him by his father and his grandfather, as well. The part of the dance that really interests me is the story of Gunyah and the sacred fish. The story starts with Gunyah going out to sea. And he saw a glitter in the water, which he thought was a fish. And when he speared it, he actually speared our sacred fish, the stingray. So the fish got angry and it started to rise up. And with its wings, it made the sea rough and it caused the sea to rise. Take us back to the time when the first human beings arrived here. What was it like then? The coastline would have been very different. So the coastline would have been right out here, on the edge of the Great Barrier Reef. The sea level was much lower and they would have fished and hunted the coastline. These were limestone hills that would have been eucalypts, marshlands. There would have been mangrove swamps. But roughly 14,000 years ago, the climate started to dramatically change. It was the end of the Ice Age. And all that water started to inundate the continental shelf and start to flood this vast, flat landscape. And in one man's lifetime? Absolutely. So, people living here are going to have to retreat? Absolutely. It would have been a dramatic time for them. They would have been following the coastline as it prograded further and further back as the water was flooding the shelf. The rate of change was so great that in these very flat areas here, the coastline would have moved back by hundreds of metres every year. Every year? Every year. Gosh! That's formidable. So our story is about the sea rising. And there used to be a cliff further out. And past the cliff is where the ocean used to be. Now, that's really remarkable. Because Western science is just beginning to make discoveries that seem to suggest that the sea, 10,000, 20,000 years ago, was way, way out there, which is exactly what your story says. Extraordinary. Yes. A folk memory of an event that happened all that time ago. Yeah. And the only way we can keep it alive is through our song and our dance. Yes. Just to keep that going through our culture. So the tradition lives. Yes. It's wonderful. It is truly astounding to think that this story has survived for so many years and across so many generations. And that it coincides with what scientists are now discovering about the age of the Great Barrier. The polyps that built the reef arrived as spawn, swept here by the ocean currents. Corals are not new to the planet. They've been around for at least 500 million years. The new reefs provided homes for thousands of animals, and very quickly, a whole new community began to establish itself. Today, the Great Barrier Reef has one of the most diverse communities of animals on the planet. And it's the story of these remarkable reef residents that I want to investigate next. To do that, the Alucia is taking me north to a very special place. Lizard Island. It's one of the 600 continental islands scattered across the Great Barrier Reef. And its shallow lagoon is known for its exceptional biodiversity. With the Alucia anchored in deeper water, a more modest mode of transport will be needed to reach the shore. I first visited Lizard Island in 1957. Then, it was completely uninhabited. Little did I know how important this remote outpost would become in helping us to understand the coral reefs. But today, that's exactly what this remarkable place is world-renowned for. Here, for the past few decades, there has been a research station where scientists can study continuously and in detail the full complexity of the community of animals that makes up the reef. Every year, Lizard Island hosts 100 different research projects. Here, scientists are shedding new light on the lives of the reefs' residents and the way in which this complex community works. Thanks to their research, we now know that coral reefs rival rainforests in the vast numbers of species they support. The first question is, where does all that diversity come from? Lizard Island reefs owe their richness to the special plants that, in places, fringe the shores. They link land and sea and they're vital to the coral reef community. They're mangroves. Taking shelter amongst the roots are thousands of juvenile fish of all shapes and sizes. Many of these little fish look harmless enough, but when they grow up, they will become some of the most ferocious predators on the reef. Indeed, the existence of these mangrove nurseries is one of the reasons why the fish populations of the reef are among the most varied and richest in the world. The mangroves are not only nurseries, they're playgrounds. The aim of the game here is to survive the most vulnerable stage of any animal's life, being a juvenile. Baby turtles rays and even sharks take refuge here. These juvenile blacktips are just a few weeks old. And only one sixth of the size they will be when they make it out on to the reef as adults. For the first year of their lives, the mangroves play a vital role in keeping them safe. As infants, they're vulnerable to predation from larger sharks. But the tangle of mangrove roots keeps the big predators out and stops them making meals of the youngsters. When the young are ready, they will eventually leave this sheltered world behind and make their way to the reef beyond the mangrove roots. The next challenge will be to find their place in one of the most crowded ecosystems on the planet. Getting on the property ladder here is no easy feat. Which is why one of the reefs most celebrated characters has developed a very special relationship. Clownfish deal with the problem of overcrowding by sharing space with another creature, gigantic anemones. They've formed a relationship in which both parties benefit. Anemones have tentacles that are packed with stinging cells. Most fish touching one get a very nasty sting, but not the clownfish, thanks to the protective layer of mucus that covers its body. The clownfish keeps the anemone in good health by removing unwanted parasites. And in return, the anemone offers security. Its stinging cells ward off the sort of creatures which would otherwise threaten the clownfish. When the time comes for a pair to breed, that protection will be vital. A female may lay up to 1,000 eggs on the rock beneath her anemone home. As she delicately attaches them, the male follows closely behind, fertilising the eggs as he goes. A week will pass before the young are ready to emerge. Hatching only happens at night, so to record it, we have to use infrared cameras in a specialised filming environment. This is the very first time that this behaviour has been filmed. With gentle encouragement from their father, the young are helped on their way. Once the little larvae are set free, they're on their own. They'll spend the first few weeks of their life developing in the open ocean. But how will the young clownfish find their way back to the coral reefs after drifting many miles out to sea? To understand that, we will have to tune into a sense we don't normally associate with this colourful underwater world. Sound. Coral reefs are surprisingly noisy places. Fish and invertebrates produce a whole range of clicks and grunts and snaps. The healthier the reef, the more varied and numerous its inhabitants and the louder this chorus is. We now know that fish, just like birds, vocalise most at dawn and dusk. Damselfish call to defend their territory. GRUNTING Seahorses click to attract a mate. CLICKING Others create a very different soundscape simply by carrying out their daily duties. SQUAWKING Parrotfish crunching through the hard coral are a constant on the reef. Fish perceive sound in two different ways. Many have internal ears, but underwater, they can also feel sound as a vibration. The noise is a key indication that the community is in good shape. In fact, the louder the noise on a reef, the more inviting it is to newcomers. Newcomers like the young clownfish. This little male is no bigger than a button, but the time has come for him to find his place in the big city. At this stage, his swimming abilities leave something to be desired. But his hearing is so sensitive, he can tell over hundreds of metres if a reef is suitable. His journey can last days. The final approach is usually made at night to avoid predators. How fish hear and respond to sound of a healthy coral reef is a major area of study here on Lizard Island. And the scientists have a simple way of collecting these fish for study. A light trap, like this one at Lizard Island, is one way of assessing the way that the reef is working. Like moths to a flame, the young are attracted by the light. By sampling the newest members of the community, scientists can figure out how far these juvenile fish are willing to travel for a good home. In the case of the clownfish, juveniles have been known to travel 250 miles before they find a reef. Fortunately, for the majority, it's usually a much shorter journey. While they rarely return to the particular anemone beside which they hatched, 60% find a new home on the same reef. For the clownfish and the anemone, cooperation is the key to success in this extremely crowded environment. Other residents, however, take a very different approach. Rather than share their home, they fiercely defend their territories. This is a mantis shrimp. Spotting the competition is half the battle. There are many different species of mantis shrimp but they all have one thing in common, superb vision. The 400 million-year-old visual system of the mantis shrimp is the most complex in the entire animal kingdom. Its eyes are mounted on two stalks, giving it independent vision, but whereas our eyes produce binocular vision, each one of theirs produces three different images. Not only that, whereas we have three photoreceptors in our eyes, the mantis shrimp has up to 16, giving it access to parts of the spectrum that we can't even see, let alone imagine. And they can use their amazing vision to devastating effect. While some are armed with spears, others carry clubs. Many are champion boxers. They can deliver a punch that accelerates faster than a .22 calibre bullet. These powerful blows are used to stun their prey and defend their burrows. Mantis shrimps are one of the more house-proud residents on the reef. In fact, they're compulsive cleaners. They keep their burrows meticulously neat. With all that effort, it's hardly surprising that they're fiercely territorial. In fact, mantis shrimps have earned themselves a reputation for being somewhat ill-tempered. But scientists have discovered that there's another side to these macho males. This young hopeful is trying to catch the eye of a potential mate. He starts by showing off his paddle-like antennae. His technique may not be very impressive to us but he is, in fact, sending the female secret signals. And that is possible because mantis shrimps can see and reflect a kind of light that absolutely no other creature in the world that we know of can see including us. The male's display is a private invitation for this female to dance. So far, so good. She makes her way to the dance floor. If the male can impress the female with his performance, she will choose him to father her offspring. It seems that this male has all the right moves. The final phase of courtship, however, usually takes place out of sight, within their burrows. The mantis shrimp is arguably one of the reefs most colourful characters and typifies the key to survival here. Each resident species has had to carve out its own particular niche and that is what has created this extraordinary diversity. Here, life can evolve 50% faster than in other marine environments. The tiny creatures that have built this remarkable ecosystem have created a habitat so complex that it supports all kinds of life. But none of the reef's residents would be here without one truly extraordinary event. It occurs just once a year and is one of the greatest of all natural spectacles. It wasn't until the 1980s that scientists discovered it, here on the Great Barrier. On a few nights of the year when the conditions are just right, all along the length of the reef, corals of many different species suddenly erupt. It's the great spawning event and it's one of the wonders of the natural world. It's the one time in the year when the corals themselves don't just grow by branching, but reproduce sexually, and it's vital for the survival of the reef. In recent years, we've learned a great deal about the many factors that influenced the moment of spawning. But even though we know it occurs within days of the full moon in October or November, the trigger that starts it all is still a mystery. The light of the moon is, perhaps, the most influential, but there are many other factors, including the temperature of the water and the state of the tides. And as the moment approaches, all along the length of the reef, there's a mounting sense of excitement. Fish and other predators gather. This will be an opportunity for a feast. The timing has to be exact. Each species of coral has its own particular triggers, but they must synchronise their behaviour to ensure their success. Just half an hour before the big event, there is the first sign of the spawning to come. Small bundles of sperm and eggs bulge from the polyps. When the moment is right, there is a mass release. For hundreds of miles all along the coast, the corals erupt. Only with daybreak can you see the true scale of the event. Great ribbons of coral spawn drift over the surface of the sea. After the coral has spawned, the billions of developing larvae are swept far and wide by the tides and the currents. The vast majority will be eaten by fish and other creatures, but the few survivors must then find a place to settle, either on a newly-vacated site on an existing reef or perhaps to found a new one. The newest coral recruits will continue the work their ancestors began almost 10,000 years ago. They are the essential organisms on which the whole reef depends. The Great Barrier is what it is because the tiny coral polyps never stop building. And what they have created is one of the wonders of the natural world. Next time, we'll cross the Great Barrier Reef to meet its extraordinary visitors. I will meet turtles that may have travelled thousands of miles to get here and the remarkable people who are trying to save them from disaster. I will come face-to-face with the great predators of the reef. Wow. There's a huge shark. They are so beautiful in the water. And we'll meet a whale that seeks out human contact, a behaviour that happens nowhere else on Earth. Some come from the open ocean, others from the land immediately inshore and still others from the sky, to complicate still further the intricate community that is known as the Great Barrier Reef. For this series, the production team set themselves an ambitious challenge. They wanted me to experience the Great Barrier Reef as never before. To achieve that, we teamed up with a very special research vessel the Alucia. There aren't many boats like this in the world and it's a kind of magic carpet for us. It allows us to float around the reef and for David to tell different parts of the story. On board, all the latest technology, helicopters, a laboratory and advanced mapping systems. At the helm of Alucia, Captain Frank Alika. The task of getting the ship into position for the first big submarine launch rests on his shoulders. Some parts are charted less well than others, but this particular bit, there's quite a lot of bombies and things out there that are likely to jump up and bite you on the bottom, and that's really not what you want. Fortunately, he's a lot more hands on than the skipper was on my first visit in 1957. But it was very primitive. The camera was wound up by clockwork and it was just me and the chap with a 16mm camera and I did the recording. It may have been a modest shoot but it was, in its way, ground-breaking. We worked on locations on the reef where film crews had never been before. 60 years later, I'm told we are poised to make history once again. This time, to reach new areas of reef, I'll have to rely on the Triton submersible. And she's very flexible in terms of how shallow we can come, as well. She'll work in 1,000 metres happily, but we can also work in the splash zone, so her actual trim system is very good. Amazing visibility, as you'll see when you get in. Yes, she's a little bit flash. With just a few short hours before the first big dive, the excitement and pressure is building on deck. This will be the last opportunity for the crew to check the camera gear and make sure everything is perfectly in place. It's been a busy morning already. We've had soundmen, cameramen trying to fit all their gear into the sub. We're sort of running out of space for bodies. There are lots of worries when you put your 88-year-old presenter in something like this. I mean, it's got a very small area at the top to get into. There are all sorts of things that can go wrong. We're always very cautious. And even the most limber of sub operators will struggle getting in the sub. David's incredibly active and fit, but he's 88 and so we were slightly worried about how he might get into the sub. Yeah, that's it, that's the one. OK, so we're just going to... See that landing, he'll guide you right in. And then you can put your foot there, David. Keep coming. Nearly there. That's it. OK. You can rest against me if you want. Nearly sat on the pilot! That's all right, I'm used to it. That's what he's there for. David, as usual, defied all our thoughts and just went straight in without any trouble as though he was a 25-year-old. Rest it on your lap. Is that OK? Yep. So, that's hatch secure and we are ready. The sub weighs almost eight tonnes and getting it into the water is a major operation. There's something quite extraordinary about the Triton being launched, standing here on deck. Suddenly, the whole back deck area of the ship comes alive. You've got people running around. Everything's incredibly detailed and carefully planned, but you're sort of caught in a whirlwind as ropes fly and the submarine starts to move forwards. You know, this is a very exciting moment. You know, this is a big day, even in the world of David Attenborough. As we disappear beneath the waves, out on a support vessel, underwater cameraman Steve Hudson prepares to film the sub as it explores the reef. So, Nick and I are going to jump in the water, descend to a maximum depth of about 30 metres and shoot exterior shots of the submarine as it cruises over the reef. It can be pretty tiring. You have to swim in front of it, swim behind it, swim beneath it, swim above it, trying to get a multiple of shots. But today, because of the strong currents, visibility is poor. At first, Steve struggles to locate the sub through the cloudy water. Finally, he makes visual contact. Before we descend deeper and beyond his reach, Steve must get his exterior shots of the sub. Lead cameraman Paul Williams captures the action from inside the vessel. To get the best footage, the divers need to coordinate with the sub team. It's a task easier said than done. We're literally in a bubble. We can't talk to the divers outside. We had this rather crude hand signal. You know, it's like, Get out of shot," or, you know, Well, just move over that way a bit. Can you see his hand signals, yeah? He's saying, "Thank you. Thank you and... We're just going to do the descent now. As the vessel dives deeper, we're treated to some spectacular sights... Oh, how beautiful. ..which show why the reef is one of the most dazzling habitats on the planet. Oh, look at this lot. It's jolly nice that someone of my age can be taken down in fantastic comfort. Grey reef shark there. No problem about breathing. No problem about talking. No problem about your movements. There's another. You're just sitting there and looking at one of the most extraordinary places on Earth. A privilege given to very few. The Great Barrier Reef. It's home to an extraordinarily diverse community of animals and plants. Here, unknown species are still being found and astonishing things discovered about creatures we thought we knew. In this series, our research vessel, the Alucia, will allow us to explore and understand the reef as never before. This marine paradise may be best known for its spectacular coral reefs but it also has 300 sand islands. 600 continental islands. Miles of lush forest. And deep ocean channels. Each of these habitats attracts a very different set of visitors. When I first came here almost 60 years ago, we knew very little about these communities. But today, new tracking systems are allowing us to follow the lives of these creatures in new ways. From the ocean's great predators to a mysterious whale that seeks out human contact. I'll discover their surprising reasons for visiting and reveal why the reef is so important for their survival. Last time, we looked at the rich community of animals that lives among the coral, but the reef also receives visitors. Some travel for thousands of miles in order to get here and stay for only a few weeks. Others linger on the fringes and come in every day. Each has its own particular reason for doing so. The Great Barrier Reef consists of 3,000 individual coral reefs. It stretches for 1,400 miles along Australia's northeast coast. And every year, it attracts over a million migrating animals. We're beginning our exploration in the north, on the outskirts of this vast wilderness. Our research vessel, the Alucia, has brought us out here to Osprey Reef. 90 miles, 150 kilometres out in the Coral Sea from the edge of the Great Barrier. Isolated though it is, it nonetheless plays a crucial part in the lives of many of the inhabitants of the Barrier Reef. What makes Osprey so interesting is that it lies in the path of the south equatorial current. This is a moving highway that sweeps a host of different visitors towards the great reef. We are here to discover why this remote outpost is so important to them. To do that, we're going to use a very special piece of technology, the Alucia's Triton submarine. It's the first submersible of its kind ever to dive in these waters. Huh! It does look as though water's gurgling up here, but in fact, my feet aren't wet. S-O, S-O, this is Nadir. Am I clear to vent? Over. Copy Nadir. So you are clear to vent, clear to vent. Have a good dive, guys. Roger. Venting now. There we are! The sub not only gives us stunning 360-degree views, it allows us to dive to depths where no unprotected human has ever been. For this dive, we are only going down to about 35 metres, just over 100 feet, where much of the wildlife we're hoping to film will be feeding. Marine geologists have recently gathered sufficient data for us to create an accurate three-dimensional picture of Osprey Reef for the very first time. It is, in fact, a huge mountain hidden beneath the waves and rising steeply from the seafloor 2,400 metres below. The top of this vast seamount creates a shallow lagoon that supports a flourishing community of corals. This wall of rock ahead of me is the flank of Osprey Reef. When cold, deep, nutrient-rich currents from the ocean come in and strike it, they defect it upwards. And that creates an oasis for living creatures of all kinds. Many creatures live here throughout the year. And the boss of them all is one kind, sharks. There's one! Close up. Whatever else you say about sharks, they are so beautiful in the water. Resident predators mean one thing - a plentiful supply of food. For creatures travelling vast distances to get to the reef, that makes Osprey a very desirable waypoint on their journey. Seamounts are stopping-off points for visitors. They come from far and wide. From tiger sharks to turtles. And they come to refuel and also, it seems, recalibrate. It appears that this is a signpost and a checkpoint on the way to the reef. Visitors arrive year round. Among them are hammerheads. Like all sharks, they have tiny sensors on their nose which can pick up signals from the earth's magnetic field. And that helps them navigate through the blue infinity of the open ocean. There are tiger sharks here, too. They come to the reef to feed. And they seem to know exactly where they're going. The proportion of their brain dedicated to smell is the largest of any shark. Their two nostrils work independently, allowing them to smell in stereo and track prey over huge distances. From Osprey, some tiger sharks travel to a very specific destination on the reef. 230 miles north of Osprey lies Raine Island. Every summer, the tiger sharks arrive without fail. They're here to take advantage of a major event on the reef - the arrival of the female green turtles. The tiger sharks aren't here to kill, they've come to scavenge on the dead. The unlucky turtles who have not survived their exhausting immigration. This is why the tiger shark has earned the unflattering title Dustbin of the Sea. They prefer the easy life of the scavenger, so the majority of green turtles have little to fear from these predators. In the summer months, the turtles arrive in thousands. They have come from as far as New Guinea, Vanuatu and New Caledonia to the east, as well as from the Torres Straits and beyond to the west. Some have travelled an impressive 1,500 miles to reach this particular beach. It measures only a few hundred metres across, a tiny speck in a vast ocean. But Raine Island plays a major role in their lives. 70% of the Barrier Reef's breeding green turtles come here to lay. It's one of the most important nesting sites in the world. I first visited Raine for a television series called Zoo Quest back in 1957. At the time, Raine was little known and rarely visited. It was then I met my first green turtle hatchling. Back then, we had no idea just how extraordinary a story these turtles had to tell. We now know that if they survive, they'll spend the next 40 years of their lives at sea. Only then do they return to Raine to breed. And astonishingly, they return to exactly the same beach where they themselves hatched. How they find their way back after decades at sea is one of the mysteries that surround this species. But new research is suggesting that, just like the sharks, they navigate using the earth's magnetic field. They weigh up to 130 kilos, so hauling themselves up the beach is a gruelling task. But it's expected that 30,000 of them will come ashore to lay their eggs this year. With space in short supply, it's every female for herself. Once they've dug a hole, laying can begin. Each egg is roughly the size of a Ping-Pong ball. A female may lay up to 120 of them at a time and she's able to do this six times in a single breeding season. Once the eggs are laid, she buries them. For the next 60 days, the sand will conceal them from predators and protect them from the blistering sun. Keeping a very close eye on the turtles' progress is Dr Andy Dunstan of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority. Raine Island is the biggest green turtle rookery in the world. So it's incredibly important with the state of green turtles at the moment. Because of this, Raine is the most protected island on the reef. Only a handful of biologists are allowed to land here and Andy and his team have done so for very good reason. A huge number of turtles are certainly coming ashore to lay their eggs on the island, but the team's observations have revealed a worrying trend. The number of young hatchlings surviving incubation in the sand has dropped to just 20%. It's a serious cause for concern. The hatchlings we're seeing coming out are nowhere near the numbers that they should be. The nests, when we dig them up, have got really low levels of successful eggs hatching. And that is happening because of the very substance that makes this island so suitable for nest-building in the first place. Raine Island's a sand island. They move. But specifically for the green turtles here, the nesting area has become lower, so what we're seeing now that we never saw 30 years ago is inundation of tidal waters. This means that at high tide, the island is being flooded from below and the developing turtle eggs are being drowned. 75% of the beach-nesting area is not suitable. Because turtles take a long time to mature, we expect to see a crash in those adult turtle numbers in the future. If we do something about hatchling success and nesting success now, we should see that recover again. Last year, Andy and his team made an ambitious plan. In a trial sector, they have raised the turtles nesting area by one and a half metres. They hope this will keep the developing eggs clear of the tidal waters and out of harm's way. Two long months after the egg laying began, the team returns to see if their plan is working. Under the cover of darkness, the first of the evening's hatchlings start to emerge. They started to push their way up through the sand about two days earlier. Now comes the moment that Andy and his team have been waiting for. A shallow trench helps to delay the new arrivals temporarily and allow the team to count them. So far, the signs are very encouraging. And as the night wears on, it gets better and better. This is looking great. We're getting much better nesting success, much better hatching success, the turtles are nesting right across the whole area and not disturbing each other so much. And those clutches which are underneath the sand are hatching much more successfully. It's confirmation that Andy and his team have found the right way to restore this vital breeding area. But for the young hatchlings, the trials of life have only just begun. Each new arrival will have to make a perilous dash to reach the ocean. Now they're on their own. Andy and his team must not interfere at this stage. Inevitably, the tiny, defenceless hatchlings attract scores of predators. SQUAWKING Terns and herons patrol the beach. And in the shallows, reef sharks lie in wait. Great numbers are lost, but enough will make it to the ocean to ensure the species' survival. As the young turtles leave the reef, they get a helping hand from the ocean currents. Swept out into the open ocean and there, they face new hazards. If they survive, they will eventually return to the very same beaches where they hatched. Remote islands like Raine are hugely important to both turtles and birds that come to the reef to lay their eggs. There are 900 isolated islands on the Great Barrier from which to choose and there's a habitat to suit every visitor. Turtles need sandy beaches and many birds need trees. The Alucia is taking us to one of these wooded islands near the southern end of the Great Barrier. Almost 1,000 miles south of Raine is Heron Island. And every year, it attracts thousands of birds seeking somewhere safe to nest. The island is surrounded by fragile coral reef. So to reach the shore, I'm leaving the Alucia anchored in deeper water. FAINT BIRDSONG The warm waters of the Barrier Reef are full of fish. Full of food, as far as birds are concerned. There are immense numbers of seabirds throughout the year on the reef. But the moment comes in the year when, in fact, a bird has to lay. And to do that, it has to go onto land. And the number of sites where they can build a nest are very limited. So they will put up with a great deal of crowding and even with intruders, like myself, without deserting their nest. Hello. Noddies are very protective parents. Very little deters them from their chick-rearing duties. Over one-and-a-half million birds come to the Great Barrier's islands every year to breed. To see one of the most intriguing, you'll have to wait until after dark. WAILING The first indication that this secretive character has arrived is its rather unusual song. WAILING The old sailors used to call it the ghost bird because of its extraordinary call. More properly known as the wedge-tailed shearwater. WAILING The birds' haunting calls guide me to their breeding grounds. WAILING These are true seafaring birds. Out at sea when they're feeding, they are very expert at flying just above the surface, or indeed swimming on the surface, catching their fish. But when they come into land, well, they have to come in in the dark, for a start. And their landing is sometimes not very expert. Night-vision cameras probably give us better pictures of their landing ground than they seem to have. Their legs with which they paddle over the surface of the sea are placed far back on their body, and that makes them clumsy walkers. These birds have travelled an extraordinary 4,000 miles to get here. After spending months feeding at sea, they've had to come to land in order to breed. Once paired, they're devoted couples and both male and female share the tasks of parenthood. Even though there are trees here, the shearwaters prefer to make their nests underground. At the bottom of the nest hole, their three-week-old chick is waiting for its next meal. TWEETING Being a shearwater parent is a demanding job. Their young requires constant feeding. It consumes so much food that eventually, it'll outweigh its own parents. But its demands compel the adults to continually fly out to sea and come back again with more food. And their takeoffs are often just as clumsy as their landings. Fortunately for their nestlings, there's no shortage of fish in the summer months. And scientists have only just discovered why that is. In the waters just beyond Heron Island, there's a rich, swirling current known as the Capricorn Eddy. As it spins clockwise, it pulls up cool waters from below, which bring rich nutrients to the surface. That fuels the growth of huge blooms of tiny marine creatures, plankton, the foundation of the entire marine food web. So this part of the reef is particularly rich with fish. Vital food for the hungry young. By choosing Heron Island as a nesting ground, the birds can give their nestlings the best possible start in life. When I first came to the Barrier Reef, we knew very little about these seasonal visitors. We could only speculate as to why they came here and where they came from. Today, new research is enabling us to understand more clearly why, every year, particular species come to specific locations to breed. But there are still large animals whose movements remain something of a mystery. Manta rays are the nomads of the reef. They're huge creatures. They can measure 15 feet, five metres across and weigh almost one-and-a-half tonnes. They come to the reef to feed on plankton, but they also use it as a sanctuary, where they can breed, or get a good clean. Many make their way to the waters that surround Lady Elliot Island on the southern end of the Great Barrier. For the visiting manta rays, this is a paradise. A place where these ocean giants can get a little pampering. These are the beauty salons of the reef. And they're often run by a pair of wrasse, small fish with a stripe running from head to tail. These committed cleaners regularly tend to a host of different creatures. They provide a vital service, removing the dead skin and parasites from outside and even inside their clients' bodies. It may seem like a thankless task, but the cleaner fish are getting a good meal out of it. And of all their clients, the manta rays are their star customers. When business is brisk, they patiently wait in line. Like planes in a holding pattern, they circle until an opportunity arrives. When it's their turn, the manta rays surrender themselves completely. Within seconds, a host of fish rush to their side. Manta rays are rarely left waiting for long. Each fish tends to a very specific part of the manta's body. And the cleaning can last a full hour. For the most part, the service is second to none. But occasionally, the cleaners can get a little carried away. A female wrasse has taken a nibble out of the manta ray's flesh. She's broken the rules, and there's a price pay. Her partner chases after her. It's the cleaner fish equivalent of a stern telling off. Scientists believe males do this to protect future business. If the bite is a one-off, the manta ray will return. But research has shown that if it happens too often, the pair risks driving regular visitors away. Fortunately, it seems her indiscretion hasn't put their client off. The manta is back and business has resumed. Manta rays come here in such numbers that the island has become the focal point for a research project. Dr Kathy Townsend has been tracking the manta's movements and numbers for the last seven years. Lady Elliot Island is like the centre of the universe for manta rays on the east coast of Australia. We come back time and time again because we get large aggregations of these animals. We are doing several things with the manta rays. First of all, we're trying to understand how many there are potentially here. And to do that, you need to do some sort of tagging. This is a key part of Kathy's work in tracking these gentle ocean giants. And the team has already attached acoustic tags to a large number of study animals. We have six acoustic listening stations around Lady Elliot Island. And as an animal goes past, within a 500-metre radius of this listening station, it picks up the tag and we know that that animal's been past. That has revealed that many of the mantas have travelled hundreds of miles up the eastern coast of Australia to get here. One of the lovely things about working with manta rays is that they're extremely curious and they'll seek you out to come and see what you're up to. It's really unusual behaviour. Most sharks and rays have no interest in having any interaction with people whatsoever. But for whatever reason, manta rays are highly-curious creatures and will basically look at you eye to eye. The manta ray's inquisitive nature works to Kathy's advantage. It means she can get close enough to photograph them for identification. And one of the best places to do that is at the cleaning stations. We need to get in underneath the animal and take a photograph from below. Each individual has a very unique spot pattern that stays with them from birth until they pass away. That's very handy for us. When Project Manta began seven years ago, it was thought that fewer than 40 individuals came to Lady Elliot. Today, Kathy and her team have catalogued more than 800. I think manta ray research is quite important because first of all, this is a very large-bodied animal that very little information is known about. Various places around the world, the manta ray populations have declined dramatically, to the point where they've now been listed as threatened on that list for endangered species. For the visiting mantas, the Great Barrier Reef really is a sanctuary. Here, this ocean giant is properly protected. While they're in these waters, they're safe from the fisheries that threaten them elsewhere. Manta rays aren't the only animals that find refuge here. The Great Barrier protects its visitors in many different ways. That becomes clear when you look at the reef from above. This part of tropical Australia lies right in the path of regular seasonal cyclones. And from up here, you can see what valuable protection the reef can provide. This tangle of limestone walls acts as a barrier against the open ocean. Between it and the land, the waters are warm and shallow. An ideal haven for visitors. In the winter, many creatures come up here to escape the freezing temperatures of the Antarctic. Among them are humpback whales. WHALE SONG Weighing up to 40 tonnes, they're the largest of the Great Barrier Reef's visitors and they have also travelled great distances to get here. Each year, they make an exhausting 6,000-mile-round trip from the Antarctic and back again. Incredibly, 20,000 of them do it. Here, in these warm and sheltered waters, they give birth and suckle their newborn calves. But in fact, we still know very little about what else they do once they get here. Where exactly do they go during their time on the reef? The fact that we don't know is a reminder of just how vast this great wilderness is. But not all whales make the task of tracking them so hard. In fact, there's one species which does quite the opposite. Incredibly, this whale actively seeks out the scientists who are trying to study them. This endearing little character is the dwarf minke whale. And surprisingly, it was only first observed here on the reef in the 1980s. But since then, we've realised that they're extremely faithful visitors, returning every year to the same location on the northern reef. Why they do so, we still don't understand. But research is beginning to reveal their story. Dr Alistair Birtles knows more about this still-mysterious species than anyone else. So he's affectionately known as Professor Minke. To observe the whales in detail, he has to step into their world. The very first time I got in the water, um... was with a degree of apprehension, great excitement. Um...I don't think I'd ever been in the water with a whale before. And the first thing you see is the white shoulder, um... and then the rest of the grey animal emerges around it. It's very special being in the water with these animals in their own environment. It's an extraordinary experience. Every year, Alistair and his research team return to spend time with the dwarf minkes. These annual reunions are beginning to reveal more and more about these fascinating creatures. It seems that they spend most of their lives out in the open ocean, leading what's thought to be a solitary existence. But surprisingly, when they get here, on the Great Reef, they actively seek human contact. Behaviour like this happens nowhere else. It is entirely the world's curiosity that brings them in. I think we're a rather strange object. We're a visitor into their world. I'm sure they're wondering exactly what we are and what we're doing, just as we're wondering what they're doing. For Birtles, there are many familiar faces here. And he has his own pet names for regular visitors. Bento, I have seen every year for the last eight years. She has a bent-over dorsal fin from I think where she was fairly savagely mauled by a shark. And last year's encounter was a particularly special one because she had a calf with her. That's the first time in eight years that we've known she had a calf. And it was a little male and it was a very special interaction. What Birtles and his team want to discover is why this usually-solitary whale suddenly becomes so extremely social when it gets here. There are a number of clues. We know they're not feeding. We've never seen them feed. But we see a lot of socialising going on. Minkes were known as the silent whale when we began working on them and there were no recordings of dwarf minkes. It went on for quite a while before we heard any sounds. And then there's an extraordinary sound they make which the researcher who labelled it called it the Star Wars sound. I thought it was a little more like Beethoven's Fifth because it's got a triple beat and then a long shwang that he thought was the lightsaber. So it goes, da-da-da-dang. WHALE SONG WHALE SONG When you hear it underwater, it kind of reverberates through your chest. It's a very powerful sound. WHALE SONG The song is only produced by males and it's thought to be related to courtship. WHALE SONG Curiously, two thirds of the individuals Alistair encounters are adolescents. One theory is that the whales are coming here to find potential mates and learn the dos and don'ts of minke social behaviour. Though Birtles' team has amassed a huge amount of data over the decades, there is clearly still much to learn. Where, for example, do the whales go after this social gathering? But now, a brand-new tagging programme is shedding more light on their annual journey. Tagging is not easy. The diver has to get into position, choose his mark and then discharge the tag, all on a single breath. There's no room for error. After initially taking fright, the whale comes back to the dive boat. It seems that minkes aren't too distressed by the process. The tracking data the team is now collecting may reveal the piece of the puzzle that, until now, has been missing. So for 20 years, we've been studying what the whales do in this area of the Great Barrier Reef. We know they're only here for a few weeks and we had no idea where they went when they left the Great Barrier Reef at the end of their sojourn here. It really is an extraordinary journey that we now know that they make. Spot, the young male that was the first ever minke to have a satellite tag attached in 2013, he travelled over 7,000 kilometres deep into the Subantarctic. That's an extraordinary journey for what is a little whale, to make. The tagging tells us where the whales are travelling fast and where they're spending extra time. There's a few places along the east coast of Australia and Bass Strait where they may spend one, two or even three weeks of time milling around, probably feeding. So we may have discovered some of these feeding sites for the dwarf minke whale along their migration path. For Birtles, it's not just about solving the mystery of where the whales go. I am worried about them when they leave the reef. The dwarf minkes are well protected when they're in the Great Barrier Reef, but when they leave there, they face many threats and dangers and they have to cross major shipping channels. There are all sorts of threats from fishing. I mean, if commercial whaling is resumed in the Southern Ocean, which is the objective of the research that's going on at the moment from the Japanese, then these whales would be at risk. It's hoped the new tagging programme may help us understand how best to protect these whales throughout the entire year. By venturing into their underwater world, Birtles and his team are discovering valuable new facts about these whales. But their research has only just begun. The more we learn about the creatures that come here, the more we discover just how important the Great Barrier Reef is to their survival. The reef is immense. Millions of visitors travel great distances to get to it. And there, find food, shelter and an opportunity to meet a mate. A global community of animals rely on this great wilderness. And that makes it one of the most important and influential habitats on the planet. Next time, in our final programme we'll investigate the dangers that now threaten the reef and its inhabitants. THUNDERCLAP We'll meet the extraordinary people who are doing everything in their power to protect this marine paradise. It is one of the most magnificent ecosystems on the planet. What's really quite shocking is that we may lose it before we truly understand it. And we'll attempt our most ambitious dive yet. Nobody has ever dived as deep as this before on the Great Barrier Reef. As we search for new species and try to predict what the future holds for the Great Barrier. For this episode, one of our underwater teams travelled to Lady Elliot Island in the south. Here, the reef's majestic manta rays are stripped of dead skin and parasites by tiny cleaner fish. The crew's goal was to film a rare behaviour. The moment when the cleaner fish breaks the rules and bites a manta ray's flesh. To film the story, the team worked closely with marine biologist, Dr Kathy Townsend. Manta rays will often seek out and spend time with divers, which, of course, makes them amazing animals to be in the water with. Manta rays may be inquisitive, but they can easily be spooked. The challenge for cameraman, Mike Pitts, was to make himself as unobtrusive as possible. You are bulky and clumsy, you've got large cameras, lights. So what you don't want to do is to obstruct the manta ray. The manta ray might get disturbed and it'll just swim off. I generally keep as low as possible. So your profile sort of matches in with the reef. And so what you notice after a while is the manta rays will come closer and closer and closer to you. And I can literally... I feel them brushing over my head as they go. While the team's objective was to film the cleaning station, on the fourth day of the shoot, they were treated to something truly unexpected. We were close to the end of the dive and we hadn't really seen anything for about 58 minutes and then I spotted a pair. I saw Kathy and suddenly she zoomed off and we followed. And I could see out in the distance, there was a male above a female and he was following her every move as she moved through the water. Kathy got really excited. They were undergoing behaviour I'd never seen before. I'd seen various types of courtship behaviour that involves having trains, where there's a female at the front followed by several males. What was happening between these two was really quite unique. The male was obviously trying to court her, but in a very unusual way. He was taking his front cephalic lobes and he was actually stroking her on her back. Obviously trying to entice her to say, Listen, you know, I'm the one for you". She, on the other hand, was not quite enthusiastic about the attention that he was bestowing upon her. And all of sudden, she'd just fling up into the air to shake him off and say, "No, it's not ready for that yet". And then she would settle back down. I knew it was something very special because, seeing Kathy's reactions to what was going on, she was so excited about it, she was bubbling. You could wait a lifetime to see something like that. Just a very rare event. In the far north, another wildlife crew had their sights set on filming a very special seasonal visitor. In winter, dwarf minke whales come to the reef for just a few short weeks. Wildlife cameraman, Dean Miller, has been documenting these whales for 15 years. It's a little bit unnerving sometimes jumping in and seeing a seven-tonne, seven-metre animal come out from the gloom. And you're hoping that it is going to be the whale and not something with a few more teeth. Every animal presents a very different challenge when it comes to filming behaviour, but over the years, Dean has learned the minke tricks of the trade. It's sometimes a game of cat and mouse, in a way. Because if you're not looking, they tend to come a lot closer. So if I can see a whale approaching in the distance and I know it's going to be a good approach this time, I'll purposely hold off and turn my dome around and actually see in the reflection of the dome the whale coming to me and then, when I think it's probably about five to six metres away, I'll turn around and get the best shot I've had all day. They sneak up on you. Over time, they build up that confidence and they just really, really try to edge much closer each and every time and get a good look. I do have other tricks, as well. I'll sing through my snorkel. HUMMING You can be in the water for seven, eight hours a day and you might only get two of these passes for that whole day. And when they happen, they're just mind-blowing. You've got this big, big animal. I mean, it's the size of a minibus, coming to look at you. You can get out at the end of a day and just have the biggest smile. I've just watched the sunset from in the water. A whale nearly touched me. It just doesn't get any better. While our underwater crews were rewarded with spectacular interactions, on Heron Island, I had the opportunity to meet one of my favourite visitors. The noddy. The birds' relaxed nature and attachment to their nests meant we could tell their story without disturbing them. Without deserting their nest. Hello. But when cameraman, Mike Pitts returns to film the hatchlings three months later, disaster hits the island on his first night. THUNDERCLAP WIND GUSTS The following morning, Mike discovers that the storm has destroyed the very spot where I had filmed. It was shattered. It was like a warzone. You think of these idyllic, tropical islands and you couldn't be further from the truth. Are you still rolling? You can see that many of the trees are down. And it's brought down the chicks with them and the nests. Eggs are smashed, chicks are dying. And the chicks that have survived are now on these trunks and branches and on the ground of the forest itself, hoping for their parent birds to find them and bring the food they need. But the parent birds are so confused because so many of the trees are gone. It's very disheartening to see it, and, er...it's a real sad sight. I'd never seen the aftermath of such a strong storm. But, of course, your emotions always get the better of you. You still see survivors, just sitting on the nest, protecting the egg or the chick. It really is quite amazing, their resilience. It puts the whole reef into a context whereby you're following the rhythms of life. We were there to record it and film it and that's part of the Great Reef story.  A hundred years ago there were one and a half billion people on Earth. Now, over six billion crowd our fragile planet. But even so, there are still places barely touched by humanity. This series will take to the last wildernesses and show you the planet and its wildlife as you have never seen them before. Imagine our world without sun. Male Emperor Penguins are facing the nearest that exists on planet Earth - winter in Antarctica. It's continuously dark and temperatures drop to minus seventy degrees centigrade. The penguins stay when all other creatures have fled because each guards a treasure. A single egg rested on the top of its feet and kept warm beneath the downy bulge of its stomach. There is no food and no water for them, and they will not see the sun again for four months. Surely no greater ordeal is faced by any animal. As the sun departs from the Antarctic it lightens the skies in the far north. It's March and light returns to the high Arctic, sweeping away four months of darkness. A polar bear stirs. She has been in her den the whole winter. Her emergence marks the beginning of spring. After months of confinement underground she toboggans down the slope. Perhaps to clean her fur, perhaps for sheer joy. Her cubs gaze out of their bright new world for the very first time. The female calls them, but this steep slope is not the easiest place to take your first steps. But they are hungry and eager to reach their mother, who's delayed feeding them on this special day. Now she lures them with the promise of milk, the only food the cubs have known since they were born deaf and blind beneath the snow some two months ago. Their mother has not eaten for five months and has lost half her body weight. Now she converts the last of her fat reserves into milk for her cubs. The spring sun brings warmth but also a problem for the mother. It starts to melt the sea ice. That is where she hunts for the seal she needs to feed her cubs. And she must get there before the ice breaks up. For now though it's still minus thirty degrees and the cubs must have the shelter of the den. It's six days since the bears emerged and spring is advancing rapidly. But even now blizzards can strike without warning. Being so small, the cubs are easily chilled and they will be more comfortable resting in the den. But their mother must keep them out and active. She's becoming weak from hunger and there's no food on these nursery slopes. The sea ice still holds firm, but it won't last much longer. Day 10, and the mother has led her cubs a mile from the den. It's time to put them to the test. They've grown enormously in confidence, but they don't have their mother's sense of urgency. At last it seems that they're ready for their journey and they're only just in time, for a few miles from the coast the ice is already splitting. Now the mother can start hunting for the seals they must have, but she's leading her cubs into a dangerous new world. Nearly half of all cubs die in their first year out on the ice. Summer brings 24 hours of sunlight and the thawing shifting landscape. Further south the winter snows have almost cleared from the Arctic tundra. Northern Canada's wild frontier. Here nature stages one of her greatest dramas - Every year three million caribou migrate across the Arctic tundra. The immensity of the herd can only be properly appreciated from the air. Some herds travel over 2,000 miles a year in search of fresh pastures. This is the longest overland migration made by any animal. They're constantly on the move. Newborn calves have to be up and running the day they are born. But the vast herds do not travel alone. Wolves. Packs of them, eight to ten strong, shadow the migration. And they are hungry. It's the newly born calves that they are after. Running directly at the herd is a ploy to generate panic. The herd breaks up and now it's easier to target an individual. In the chaos a calf is separated from its mother. The calf is young, but it can outrun the wolf if only it manages to keep its footing. At this stage the odds are even - either the caribou will make a mistake or after a mile the wolf will give up. Midsummer on the tundra and the sun does not set. At these latitudes the sun's rays are glancing and not enough of their energy reaches the ground to enable trees to grow. You'll need to travel 500 miles south from here before that is possible. These stunted shrubs mark the tree line - the beginning of the boreal forest - the taiga. The needle-shaped leaves of the conifers are virtually inedible so this forest supports very little animal life. It's a silent place where the snow is unmarked by footprints. In the Arctic winter snow forms a continuous blanket across the land. But as spring creeps up from the south the taiga is unveiled. This vast forest circling the globe contains a third of all the trees on Earth and produces so much oxygen it changes the composition of the atmosphere. As we travel south so the sun's influence grows stronger and at 50 degrees of latitude a radical transformation begins. Summers here are long enough for broadleaf trees to replace conifers. Broadleaves are much easier to eat and digest so now animals can collect their share of the energy that has come from the sun. It's summer and these forests are bustling with life. But the good times will not last. Broad leaves must be shed in winter for their damage by frost. As they disappear, so the land becomes barren with little for animals to eat. The inhabitants must migrate, hibernate, or face months of near starvation. The Amur leopard - the rarest cat in the world. Here, in the deciduous forests of eastern Russia the winter makes hunting very difficult. Pray animals are scarce, and there's no concealing vegetation. The cub is a year old and still dependent on its mother. Deer are frequent casualties of the harsh winter and these leopards are not above scavenging from a corpse. African leopards could never survive here, but the Russian cats have thick fur to shield them from the cold. There are only forty Amur leopards left in the wild and that number is falling. Like so many creatures, the cats have been pushed to the very edge of extinction by hunting and the destruction of their habitat. The Amur leopard symbolizes the fragility of our natural heritage. The future of an entire species hangs on survival of a tiny number of mothers like this one. All animals, rare or common, ultimately depend for their energy on the sun. In Japan the arrival of the cherry blossom announces the beginning of spring. The sun's energy brings color to the landscape. The earth, as it makes its annual journey around the sun, spins on a tilted axis. And it's this tilt that creates the seasons. The advance of the seasons brings constant change. As the sun's influence diminishes in the north, so the deciduous forests of America begin to shut down losing their leaves in preparation for the dark cold months ahead. One season hands over to another. Some organisms thrive on decay, but most must make special preparations for winter and a life with little sun. Whole populations of animals are now forced to travel great distances in pursuit of food and warmth. 300,000 Baikal teal gather to escape from the Siberian winter by migrating south to Korea - the world's entire population in a single flock. But there are parts of the world that have no seasons. In the tropics the sun's rays strike the earth head on and their strength is more or less constant all year round. That is why the jungle grows so vigorously and supports so much life. This forest covers only 3 percent of the planet's surface, but it contains more than 50 percent of all its plants and animals. The canopy is particularly rich. There are monkeys, birds and millions of species of insects, exactly how many we have no idea. The character of the forest changes as we descend, becoming ever darker and damper, favoring different kinds of animals and plants. Less than 2 percent of the sunlight reaches the floor, but even here there is extraordinary variety. In the great island of New Guinea there are 42 different species of birds of paradise, each more bizarre than the last. This forest is so rich that nourishing food can be gathered very quickly. That leaves the male six-plumed bird of paradise with time to concentrate on other matters like tidying up his display area. Everything must be spick and span. All is ready. Very impressive, but no one is watching. The superb bird of paradise calls to attract a female. And he has more luck. But what does he have to do to really impress her? She retires to consider her verdict. It's hard not to feel deflated when even your best isn't good enough. The sun influences life in the oceans just as it does on land. Its richest parts are those where waves and currents bring fertilizing nutrients to surface waters that are bathed in sunlight. The seas off the Cape in South Africa have this magic recipe and are hugely productive. Summer is the time of plenty and it's now that the seals start to breed. The strike of a great white shark lasts a mere second. Slowing it down forty times reveals the technique and immense strength of this massive predator. If surprise fails, there will be a chase. The shark is faster on a straight course but it can't turn as sharply as the seal, its agility versus power. Once the seals have finished breeding the giant sharks will move on. It's now becoming clear that great whites migrate thousands of miles across the oceans to harvest seasonal abundances in different seas. The sun, beating down on tropical waters, powers the weather systems of the globe. Moisture evaporates from the warming ocean and rises to create great storms. The winds generated out at sea sweep inland across the continents. As they travel across the Sahara they create the biggest of all sand storms blowing sand halfway round the world to fertilize the Amazon jungle. Winds blowing across the Indian Ocean collect moisture and sweep northwards towards the Himalayas. As the air rises, so it cools. The water it carries condenses into clouds and then falls as the life giving rains of the monsoon. So air currents powered by the sun carry wet air to the middle of continents. Without water there can be no life, but its distribution over the land is far from even. Deserts cover one third of the land's surface and they're growing bigger every year. This is the Kalahari Desert in Southern Africa. It's the dry season and thousands of elephants have started to travel in desperate search for water. All across Southern Africa animals are journeying for the same reason. Buffalo join the great trek. Nowhere else on Earth are so many animals on the move with the same urgent purpose. They're all heading for the swamps of the Okavango, a vast inland delta. At the moment it is dry, but water is coming. The travelers are hampered by dangerous dust storms. Females and calves can easily get separated from the main herd. For this pair sanctuary lies in the patch of woodland a few miles ahead. They can't rest until they reach it. The main has already got there safely. Finally, the stragglers emerge from the dust. The exhausted calf is still blinded by sand. Its mother does everything possible to help it. The storm is now subsiding, but not all the elephants have been so lucky. One youngster has got lost. Thirsty and exhausted, it follows the tracks of its mother, but sadly in the wrong direction. At the peak of the dry season in the Kalahari water arrives in the Okavango. It fell as rain a thousand miles away in the highlands of Angola and has taken nearly five months to reach here. The water drives out insects from the parched ground, which are snapped up by plovers. Catfish, traveling with the flood, collect any drowning creatures the birds have missed. It's a seasonal feast for animals of all kinds. Birds are the first to arrive in any numbers - wattled cranes, then black storks. Behind the birds come buffalo. After weeks of marching their trek is coming to an end. As the water sweeps into the Okavango a vast area of the Kalahari is transformed into a fertile paradise. Nowhere on our planet is the life giving power of water so clearly demonstrated. The Okavango becomes criss-crossed with trails as animals move into its heart. The new arrivals open up paths like arteries along which water flows, extending the reach of the flood. This is an Africa rarely seen - a lush water world. Some creatures are completely at home here. These are lechwe - antelope with hooves that splay widely, enabling them to move its speed through the water. For others the change is far less welcome. Baboons are somewhat apprehensive bathers. The water brings a season of plenty for all animals. Hunting dogs. These are now among the rarest of Africa's mammals, but then nonetheless the continent's most efficient predators. Their secret is teamwork. Impala are their favorite prey. They start to hunt and the pack splits up. An aerial viewpoint gives a new insight into their strategy. As the dogs approach their prey they peel off to take up separate positions around their target. They seem to form a cordon around the impala. Moving in total silence they take up their positions. Those ears can detect the slightest rustle. The hunt is on. Three dogs close in on one impala. Missed. The lead dog drives the impala towards the hidden flankers. Anticipating their line the leader cuts the corner and joins a flanker for the final assault. It's all or nothing. One on one. The dog has stamina, the impala has speed. Leaping into the lake is an act of desperation - impala can barely swim. The dogs know their prey must come out or drown - now it's a waiting game. The rest of the pack are calling. They've made a kill in the forest and this is an invitation to join in the meal. The impala is in luck. A pack this size kills once a day and everything is shared. And this impala is reprieved. The elephants are nearing the end of their long journey. After weeks of marching they're desperately tired. The matriarch can smell water and encourages the herd to make one last effort. The youngsters are exhausted but their mothers have made this journey before and they know that they're close to water. After many hundreds of miles they've arrived. The lives of these elephants are dominated by the annual rhythm of wet and dry, a seasonal cycle created by the sun. At the southern end of the earth, after four months of total darkness, the sun once more rises over Antarctica. Now at last the Emperor penguins abandon their huddle. The males are still carrying the precious eggs that they've cherished throughout the Antarctic winter. With the returning sun the eggs hatch. Other birds have not even arrived. But the Emperors by enduring the long black winter have given their chicks a head start. These youngsters are now ready and eager to make the most of the brief Antarctic summer. Human beings venture into the highest parts of our planet at their peril. Some might think that by climbing a great mountain they have somehow conquered it, but we can only be visitors here. This is a frozen alien world. This is the other extreme - one of the lowest hottest places on Earth. It's over a hundred meters below the level of the sea. But here a mountain is in gestation. Pools of sulphuric acid are indications that deep underground there are titanic stirrings. This is the Danakil Depression in Ethiopia, lying within a colossal rent of the earth's surface where giant land masses are pulling away from one another. Lava rises to the surface through this crack in the crust creating a chain of young volcanoes. This one, Erta Ale, is today the longest continually erupting volcano on the planet, a lake of lava that has been molten for over a hundred years. These same volcanic forces also created Ethiopia's highlands. 70 million years ago this land was just as flat and as deep as the Danakil Depression. Molten lava rising from the earth's core forced up a huge dome of rock 500 miles wide, the roof of Africa. Over millennia, rain and ice carved the rock into a landscape of spires and canyons. These summits, nearly 3 miles up, are home to some very remarkable mountaineers - Gelada baboons. They are unique to the highlands of Ethiopia. The cliffs where they sleep are for expert climbers only, and Gelado certainly have the right equipment. The strongest fingers of any primate and an utterly fearless disposition. But you need more than a head for heights to survive up here. A day in a Gelado's life reveals how they've risen to the challenge. For all monkeys morning is grooming time, a chance to catch up with friends. But, unlike other monkeys, Gelados chatter constantly while they do it. It's a great way to network while your hands are busy. But these socials can't go on for too long. Gelados have a busy daily schedule and there's work to be done. Most monkeys couldn't live up here. There's no food and few insects to feed on. But Gelados are unique - they're the only monkeys in the world that live almost entirely on grass. They live in the largest assemblies formed by any monkeys. Some groups are 800 strong and they crop the high meadows like herds of wildebeest. The Gelados graze alongside Walia ibex, which are also unique to these highlands. These rare creatures are usually very shy but they drop their guard when the Gelados are around. You might expect that grazers would avoid each other's patch but this is a special alliance from which both partners benefit. It's not so risky to put your head down if others are on the lookout. Ethiopian wolves - they won't attempt an attack in broad daylight. But at dusk the plateau becomes a more dangerous place. With the grazing largely over there's a last chance to socialize before returning to the sleeping cliffs. An early warning system puts everyone on the alert. Their day ends as it began, safe on the steep cliffs. The Ethiopian volcanoes are dormant, but elsewhere others still rage. Volcanoes form the backbone of the longest mountain chain on our planet - the Andes of South America. This vast range stretches 5,000 miles from the Equator down to the Antarctic. It formed as the floor of the Pacific Ocean slid beneath the South American continent, buckling its edge. At the southern end stand the mountains of Patagonia. It's high summer, but the Andes have the most unstable mountain weather on the planet and storms can erupt without warning. Temperatures plummet and guanacos and their newborn young must suddenly endure a blizzard. Truly, all seasons in one day... A puma - the lion of the Andes. Pumas are usually solitary and secretive. To see a group walking boldly in the open is extremely rare. It's a family - a mother with four cubs. She has just one brief summer in which to teach them their mountain survival techniques. Rearing four cubs to this age is an exceptional feat, but she does have an excellent territory, rich in food and water. Although the cubs are now as large as their mother, they still rely on her for their food. It will be another year before the cubs can hunt for themselves. Without their mother's skill and experience they would never survive their first winter. Battered by hurricane force winds, these slopes are now lifeless. Further north, they hold other dangers. Moving at 250 miles an hour, an avalanche destroys everything in its path. In the American Rockies a 100,000 avalanches devastate the slopes every winter. This huge mountain chain continues the great spine that runs from Patagonia to Alaska. The slopes of the Rockies, bleak though they are, provide a winter refuge for some animals. A mother grizzly emerges from her den after six months' dozing underground. Her two cubs follow her and take their first steps in the outside world. These steep slopes provide a sanctuary for the cubs. A male bear would kill and eat them given the chance. But big animals find it difficult to get about here. Males may be twice the size of a female and even she can have problems. Her cubs, however, make light of the snow and of life in general. But the mother faces a dilemma. It's six months since she last fed and her milk is starting to run dry. She must soon leave the safety of these nursery slopes and lead her cubs away from the mountain. If she delays, the whole family will risk starvation. Summer reveals the true nature of the Rockies. Stripped of snow, the peaks bear their sculpted forms. Only now can mountaineers reclaim the upper reaches. Two miles up the crumbling precipices seem devoid of life. But there are animals here - a grizzly bear. It seems to be an odd creature to find on these high rocky slopes. It's hard to imagine what could have attracted it here. At this time of the year bears should be fattening up for the winter. Yet they gather in some numbers on these apparently barren slopes. They're searching for a rather unusual food - moths. Millions have flown up here to escape the heat of the lowlands and they're now roosting among the rocks. Moths may seem a meager meal for a bear, but their bodies are rich in fat and can make all the difference in a bear's annual struggle for survival. Another battle is being waged here but on a much longer timescale. These loose boulders are the mountain's crumbling bones. The Rockies are no longer rising but slowly disintegrating. All mountains everywhere are being worn down by frost, snow and ice. The Alps were raised some 15 million years ago as Africa, drifting northwards, collided with the southern edge of Europe. These spires are the eroded remains of an ancient seabed that once stretched between the two continents. But these are just the Alpine foothills. The range at its center rises to 3 miles high and is crowned with permanent snows. The Matterhorn, its summit too steep to hold a snow field. Mont Blanc - the highest peak in Western Europe. The distinctive jagged shapes of the Alps were carved by those great mountain sculptors - the glaciers. Immense rivers of moving ice, laden with rock, grind their way down the mountains, gouging out deep valleys. They're the most powerful erosive force on our planet. A moulin - a shaft in the ice opened by melt water as it plunges into the depths of the glacier. Like the water running through it, the ice itself is constantly moving, flowing down the valley with unstoppable force. Alpine glaciers may seem immense, but they're dwarfed by those in the great ranges that divide the Indian subcontinent from Tibet. This is the boulder strewn snout of the giant Baltoro glacier in the Karakoram mountains of Pakistan. It's the biggest mountain glacier on Earth - 43 miles long and over 3 miles wide. This huge ice-filled valley is so large it's clearly visible from space. This is the greatest concentration of peaks over 5 miles high to be found anywhere on Earth. They're the most dangerous mountains of all. K2 and her sister peaks have claimed more lives than any others. The peaks here rise so precipitously, the glaciers are so steep and crevassed that few except the most skilled mountaineers can penetrate these ranges. Markhor gather for their annual rut. Males must fight for the right to breed, but on these sheer cliffs any slip by either animal could be fatal. A snow leopard - the rarest of Himalayan animals. It's a female returning to her lair. These are the first intimate images of snow leopard ever filmed in the wild. She greets her one year old cub. Her den is well chosen. It has exceptional views of the surrounding cliffs. On these treacherous slopes no hunter other than the snow leopard would have a chance of catching such fragile prey. A female with young makes an easier target. Her large paws give an excellent grip and that long tail helps her balance. Silently she positions herself above her prey. She returns with nothing. Golden eagles patrol these cliffs in search of the weak or injured. With a 2 meter wing span this bird could easily take a young markhor. Eagles hunt by sight and the thickening veil of snow forces them to give up. For the leopard the snow provides cover and creates an opportunity. The worsening weather dampens the sound of her approach allowing her to get within striking distance. It was an act of desperation to try and catch such a large animal. Wolves have made a kill giving other hunters a chance to scavenge. The worst of the blizzard brings success for the snow leopard, but having descended so far to make the kill she has a grueling climb to get back to her lair. The cub must be patient. It'll be a year before it has the strength and skill to kill for itself on these difficult slopes. The snow leopard is an almost mythical creature, an icon of the wilderness, an animal few humans have ever glimpsed for its world is one we seldom visit. The Karakoram lie at the western end of a range that stretches across a tenth of our planet - the Himalayas. These, the highest mountains of the world, like other great ranges, were created by the collision of continents. Some 50 million years ago India collided with Tibet thrusting up these immense peaks, which are still rising. This vast barrier of rock and ice is so colossal it shapes the world's climate. Warm winds from India, full of moisture, are forced upwards by the Himalayas. As the air rises so it cools, causing clouds to form and the monsoon is born. At high altitudes the monsoon rains fall as snow. Here, at the far eastern end of the range in China, one inhabitant endures the bitter winters out in the open. Most other bears would be sleeping underground by now, but the giant panda can't fatten up enough to hibernate. Its food, bamboo, on which it totally relies has so little nutritional value that it can't build up a store of fat like other bears. Most of the creatures here move up or down the slopes with the seasons but the panda is held captive by its diet for the kind of bamboo it eats only grows at this altitude. But these forests hold fewer challenges for the more mobile. The golden snap-nosed monkey, like the giant panda, lives only in China. Their thick fur allows them to survive at greater altitudes than any other monkey and when the cold bites they have these upper slopes to themselves. Even if you have a warm coat it apparently helps to surround yourself with as many layers as possible. But at least these monkeys have a choice - if they tire of tree bark and other survival food they can always descend to lower warmer altitudes and not return there till spring. As the snows retreat trees come into bloom. Cherry blossom. Rhododendrons - here in their natural home they form great forests and fill the landscape with the covers of a new season. These forests are a host to a rich variety of springtime migrants. Beneath the blooms - another display. It's the mating season for oriental pheasants, Himalayan monal, tragopan and blood pheasant. Musk deer make the most of a short flash of spring foods. This male smells a potential mate. The red panda, rarely glimpsed in the wild. It was once considered a kind of raccoon, but is now believed to be a small mountain bear. By midsummer its larger, more famous relative, has retreated into a cave. A giant panda nurses a tiny week old baby. Her tender cleaning wards off infection. She won't leave this cave for three weeks, not while her cub is so utterly helpless. Progress is slow for milk produced on a diet of bamboo is wretchedly poor. Four weeks old and the cub is still blind. Its eyes do not fully open until three months after birth, but the chances of the cub reaching adulthood are slim. The struggle of a giant panda mother to raise her cub is a touching symbol of the precariousness of life in the mountains. On the highest summits of our planet nothing can live permanently. The highest peak of all, Mount Everest, five and a half miles above sea level and still rising - the roof of our world. Of those humans who've tried to climb it one in ten have lost their lives. Those that succeed can stand for only a few moments on its summit. The Nepalese call it 'a mountain so high no bird can fly above it.' But each year over 50,000 demoiselle cranes set out on one of the most challenging migrations on Earth. To reach their overwintering grounds in India they must cross the Himalayas. By late morning ferocious winds are roaring past the peaks. The cranes must gain height to avoid the building storm. They've hit serious turbulence. They must turn back or risk death. A new day and a new opportunity. The flock stay in close contact by calling one another. Weak from lack of food and water, they use thermals, rising columns of warm air, to gain height. For many this is their first journey across the Himalayas. For some, it will be their last. The golden eagles have been expecting them. The eagles work in pairs to separate a young crane from the flock. It escapes the touches of one, and is caught by another. But even a young crane is a heavy prize and the eagle has to struggle to control it. The mother can wait no longer - this is a desperate race against worsening weather. The rest of the flock battle on. In the ascent every wing beat becomes an exhausting struggle. At last they are over the highest barrier that lies in their way. But like all who visit the world of the high mountains they dare not linger. Only 3 percent of the water on our planet is fresh. Yet these precious waters are rich with surprise. All life on land is ultimately dependent upon fresh water. The mysterious tepuis of Venezuela - isolated mountain plateaus rising high above the jungle. This was the inspiration for Arthur Conan Doyle's 'Lost World,' an imagined prehistoric land. Here, strange towers of sandstone have been sculptured over the millennia by battering wind and torrential rain. Moisture rising as water vapor from the surface of the sea is blown inland by wind. On reaching mountains, the moisture is forced upwards and as it cools, it condenses into cloud and finally rain - the source of all fresh water. There is a tropical downpour here almost every day of the year. Fresh water's journey starts here, high in the mountains. Growing from humble streams to mighty rivers it will travel hundreds of miles to the sea. Angel Falls, the highest waterfall in the world. Its waters drop unbroken for almost a thousand meters. Such is the height of these falls that long before the water reaches the base in the Devil's Canyon it's blown away as a fine mist. In their upper reaches, mountain streams are full of energy. Streams join to form rivers, building in power, creating rapids. The water here is cold. Low in nutrients, but high in oxygen. The few creatures that live in the torrent have to hang on for dear life. Invertebrates dominate these upper reaches. The hellgrammite, its body flattened to reduce drag, has bushy gills to extract oxygen from the current. Black fly larvae anchor themselves with the ring of hooks, but if these become unstuck, they're still held by a silicon safety line. There are advantages to life in the fast stream - bamboo shrimps can just sit and sift out passing particles with their fan-like forearms. Usually, these mountain streams only provide enough food for small animals to survive. But with the spring melt here in Japan monsters stir in their dens. Giant salamanders, world's largest amphibian, almost two meters long. They're the only large predator in these icy waters. They begin their hunt at night. These salamanders have an exceptionally slow metabolism. Living up to 80 years they grow into giants. The fish they hunt are scarce and salamanders have poor eyesight. But sensory nodes on their head and body detect the slightest changes in water pressure. Free from competition, these giants can dine alone. Pickings are usually thin for the salamanders, but every year some of the world's high rivers are crowded by millions of visitors. The salmon have arrived. This is the world's largest fresh water fish migration. Across the northern hemisphere salmon, returning from the ocean to their spawning grounds, battle their way for hundreds of miles upstream. Up here, there are fewer predators to eat their eggs and fry. A grizzly bear. From famine to feast - he's spoilt for choice. This Canadian bear is very special - he's learnt to dive for his dinner. But catching salmon in deep water is not that easy and the cubs have lots to learn. The annual arrival of spawning salmon brings huge quantities of food into these high rivers that normally struggle to support much life. Although relatively lifeless, the power of the upland rivers to shape the landscape is greater than any other stage in a river's life. Driven by gravity, they're the most erosive forces on the planet. For the past 5 million years Arizona's Colorado river has eaten away at the desert's sandstone to create a gigantic canyon. It's over a mile deep and at its widest it's 17 miles across. The Grand Canyon. This river has cut the world's longest canyon system - a 1,000 mile scar clearly visible from space. As rivers leave the mountains behind, they gradually warm and begin to support more life. Indian rivers are home to the world's most social otter - smooth-coated otters form family groups up to 17 strong. Group rubbing not only refreshes their coats, but strengthens social bonds. When it comes to fishing there is real strength in numbers. Fishing practice begins when the cubs are four months old. Only the adults have the speed and agility needed to make a catch. Adults share their catches with their squabbling cubs. Most otters are solitary, but these rich warm waters can support large family groups and even bigger predators. Mugger crocodiles, four meters long, could easily take a single otter. But, confident in their gangs, the otters will actively harass these great reptiles. Team play wins the day. The Mara river, snaking across the plains of East Africa. As the land flattens out rivers slow down and lose their destructive power. Now they are carrying heavy loads of sediment that stains their waters brown. Lines of wildebeest are on their march. Each year nearly two million animals migrate across the Serengeti plains in search of fresh green pastures. For these thirsty herds the rivers are not only a vital source of drinking water, but also dangerous obstacles. This is one of the largest concentrations of Nile crocodiles in Africa, giants that grow over five meters long. From memory, the wildebeest are coming and gather in anticipation. The crocodile's jaws snap tight like a steel trap - once they have a hold, they never let go. It took over an hour to drown this full-grown bull. To surprise their prey crocodiles must strike with lightning speed. Here, only the narrowest line separates life from death. Most rivers drain into the sea, but some end their journey in vast lakes. Worldwide lakes hold twenty times more fresh water than all the rivers. The East African Rift Valley holds three of the world's largest. Malawi, Tanganyika, and Victoria. Lake Malawi, the smallest of the three, is still bigger than Wales. Its tropical waters teem with more fish species than any other lake. There are 850 different cichlids alone, all of which evolved from just one single ancestor isolated here thousands of years ago. These two-meter wide craters are fish-made. Fastidiously maintained by the males, these bowls are courtship arenas. Cichlids are caring parents. Brooding young in the mouth is a very effective way of protecting them. This lake can be a dangerous place. After dark, predatory dolphin fish emerge from their daytime lairs among the rocks. Like packs of sharks, they're on the prowl for sleeping cichlids. In the darkness these electric fish hunt by detecting distortions in the electric field they create around their bodies. Any cichlid that trenches out will be snapped up. The floor of Lake Malawi drops 700 meters into an abyss. Here, in this dead zone the larvae of lake fly midges hide out away from predators. In the rainy season they balloon up to the surface and undergo a magical transformation. At dawn the first adult midges start to break out. Soon, millions upon millions of newly hatched lake flies are taking to the wing. Early explorers told tales of lakes that smoked, as if on fire. But these spiraling columns hundreds if meters high are mating flies. Once the flies have mated, they will all drop to the water surface, release their eggs and die. Malawi may look like an inland sea, but it's dwarfed by the world's largest lake - Baikal in Eastern Siberia. 400 miles long and over a mile deep, Baikal contains one fifth of all the fresh water found in our planet's lakes and rivers. For five months of the year it's sealed by an ice sheet over a meter thick. Baikal is the oldest lake in the world and, despite the harsh conditions, life flourishes here in isolation. 80 percent of its species are found nowhere else on Earth, including the world's only fresh water seal. With this seal and its marine-like forests of sponges Baikal seems more like an ocean than a lake. There are shrimp-like crustaceans - giant amphipods - as large as mice. They are the key scavengers in this lake. The water here is just too cold for the bacteria that normally decompose the dead. Most rivers do not end in lakes but continue their journey to the sea. The planet's indisputable super-river is the Amazon. It carries as much water as the next top-ten biggest rivers combined. Rising in the Peruvian Andes, its main trunk flows eastwards across Brazil. On its way the system drains a third of South America. Eventually, over 4,000 miles from its source, it empties into the Atlantic Ocean. The Amazon transports a billion tons of sediment a year, sediment clearly visible at the mixing of the waters where one massive tributary, the Rio Negro, flows into the main river. Its waters are wonderfully rich. To date over 3,000 species of their fish have been described - more than in the whole of the Atlantic Ocean. The Amazon is so large and rich in fish that it can support fresh water dolphins. These botos are huge - two and a half meters long. In these murky waters they rely on sonar to navigate and hunt. They work together to drive shoals of fish into the shallows. Botos are highly social and in the breeding season there is stiff competition for mates. The males hold court in a unique way. They pick up rocks in their jaws and flaunt them to their attending females. Maybe each male is trying to show how strong and dexterous he is and that he therefore is the best father a female could have for her young. Successful displays lead to mating. Even for giant rivers like the Amazon the journey to the sea is not always smooth or uninterrupted. Iguassu Falls on the border of Brazil and Argentina is one of the widest waterfalls in the world - one and a half miles across. In flood 30 million liters of water spill over every second. All the world's great broad waterfalls. Victoria, Niagara and here, Iguassu, are only found in the lower courses of their rivers. In their final stages rivers broaden and flow wearily across their flat flood plains. Each wet season here, in Brazil, the Parana river overflows its banks and floods an area the size of England. The Pantanal - the world's largest wetland. In these slow-flowing waters aquatic plants flourish like the Victoria giant water lily with leaves two meters across. These underwater forests are nursery grounds for fish. Over 300 species breed here, including red-bellied piranha and other predators, like the spectacle caiman. Ripening fig trees overhanging the water's edge provide welcome food for shoals of hungry fish. The commotion attracts dorado, known locally as the river tiger. They patrol the feeding shoals, looking for a chance to strike. And waiting in the wings, ready to pick off any injured fish, are the piranhas. The feeding frenzy quickly develops. Piranha can strip a fish to the bone in minutes. Great numbers of fish sustain vast flocks of water birds. The rose-eared spoonbill is just one of the 650 bird species found in the Pantanal. They nest alongside wood stocks in colonies thousands strong. Spectacle caiman linger below, waiting for a meal to fall out of the sky. When rivers finally reach the sea they slow down, release their sediment and build deltas. In Bangladesh the Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers join to form the world's biggest. Every year almost 2 thousand million tons of sediment eroded from the Himalayas is delivered to the ocean. At the delta's mouth - the largest mangrove forest in the world, the Sundarbans. These extraordinary forests spring up throughout the tropics in these tidal zones where rivers meet the sea. Crab-eating macaques are mangrove specials. In Indonesia these monkeys have adopted a unique amphibious lifestyle - they fish out fallen food. The troop also uses the waters to cool off during the heat of the day. But the channels are also the playground for restless young macaques. Some of the young have even taken to underwater swimming. They can stay down for more than 30 seconds and appear to do this just for fun. Yet these swimming skills acquired during play will certainly be useful later in life in these flooded mangrove forests. In cooler climes, mud, laid down in estuaries, is colonized by salt marsh grasses and form one of the most productive habitats on the planet. 400,000 greater snow geese flock to the estuaries along the Atlantic coast of the United States to rest and refuel on their long migratory journeys. This is the end of the river's journey. Collectively they've worn down mountains and carried them to the sea. And all along the way, their fresh water has brought life and abundance to planet Earth. This is our planet's final frontier, an inner world where only the most adventurous dare to go. Beneath our feet are countless miles of cave shafts and passages. The Cave of Swallows in Mexico, 400 meters to the bottom, deep enough to engulf the Empire State Building. This is the biggest cave shaft in the world. Yet these depths were first explored only two years before man landed on the moon. Today caves remain the least explored places on Earth. However, human beings are seldom the first to reach these black, damp places. Here, live some of the strangest and least-known animals on the planet. This galaxy of little lights is created by thousands of living creatures. Any animal that lives in a cave has to cope with complete blackness, but in New Zealand some have turned this darkness to their advantage. A silicon strand is lowered from the ceiling, alongside hundreds of others. Beautiful though these threads are, they have a sinister purpose. This is a cave glow worm. To trap its prey it goes fishing with a line of silk. The silk comes from glands in the glow worm's mouth and is loaded with droplets of mucus. Each glow worm produces dozens of these threads. Once its lines are set, the glow worm hangs from a mucus hammock and waits, like a patient angler. But the glow worm doesn't leave everything to chance. That ghostly blue light is the result of a chemical reaction taking place inside a special capsule in its tail. The light literally shines out of its backside. It's a lure for attracting prey. Insects seem irresistibly drawn towards the source and then get trapped by the sticky lines. Once stuck, there is no escape. Now it's just a matter of reeling in the line and slowly consuming the catch - alive. By ensnaring the insects that hatch in this cave, these glow worms have solved the biggest challenge that permanent cave dwellers face - finding a regular and reliable source of food. One kind of rock makes this whole underground world possible - limestone. Most of the world's caves are found within it and it covers nearly 10 percent of the earth's surface. Limestone is composed of minerals derived from marine shells and corals, so although this rocky escarpment in the United States is now hundreds of meters above sea level it was actually formed under water. The limestone towers of Vietnam's Ha Long Bay are a reminder of this link with the sea. Originally, this whole area would have been one solid block of limestone, the base of a coral reef. In Borneo, rain has sculptured the limestone into extremely sharp-sided pinnacles. But the dissolving power of rainwater has other, much more dramatic effects underground. Rivers that flow over limestone often seem to completely disappear. When the water reaches the more resistant bed of limestone its course is altered. Once underground, the water takes on a new, more erosive power. During its journey from the surface the water absorbed carbon dioxide from the soil making it mildly acidic. And over millions of years this acid eats away the limestone creating a maze of caverns and passages that sometimes go on for miles. This is the biggest underground river passage in the world, so big a jumbo jet could fly through it. It's Deer Cave, in Borneo. The sheer size of Deer Cave allows some animals to gather there in huge numbers. A staggering 3 million wrinkle-lipped bats live here. The bats roost high on the walls and ceilings where they're well protected from the outside elements and safe from predators. And while they're up here the bats produce something very important. This hundred meter high mound is made entirely of bat droppings - guano. Its surface is covered by a thick carpet of cockroaches, hundreds of thousands of them. Caves are one of the few habitats on Earth not directly powered by sunlight. In the absence of plants this food chain is based on a continuous supply of bat droppings. The cockroaches feed on the guano and anything that falls into it. The droppings also support other types of cockroaches which spend part of their day resting on cave walls. These in turn become food for giant cave centipedes, some more than 20 centimeters long. Bizarrely, there are crabs here, too, sifting through the droppings for nutrients. All these animals spend their entire lives within the cave. They're totally dependant on the digested remains of food that's brought here from outside. Each evening in just two hours three million bats leave the safety of the cave to hunt for insects in the forest outside. But not all will return. As they leave the cave the stream of bats form a doughnut-shaped ring. The wheeling bats seem to confuse a rufus-bellied eagle, but they must still survive the attacks of other, more specialized, birds of prey. Peregrine falcons and bat hawks are the jetfighters of the bird world. Good hunting will end as the light fades so the bat hawks bolt their catches on the wing and fly straight back for more. Any bat separated from the group becomes a clear and obvious target and is asking for trouble. Yet the nightly onslaught has little impact on bat numbers - by the morning the vast majority will be back in the safety of the cave. Bats are not the only commuters in these Bornean caves. There's a day shift as well. Returning from hunting in the sunlight these commuters rely on their loud clicks to find their way through the cave passages in total darkness. They're cave swiftlets. Like bats they use echolocation to navigate. We need lights to see what's going on, but in the pitch black the swiftlets manage unerringly to locate their individual nesting sites, which are only a few centimeters across. It's a remarkable skill and one we still do not fully understand. These birds are unusual for another reason. Their little cup-like nests are made entirely from threads of saliva. It takes more than 30 days to complete one. The nests are very precious objects, and not only for the birds. For 500 years people have been harvesting the nests of cave swiftlets. It's a very risky business. With virtually no safety equipment and using ladders made from forest vines the gatherers climb into the highest reaches of the cave often more than 60 meters from the floor. The work may be hazardous in the extreme, but the rewards are great. The pure white nests of cave swiftlets are the main ingredient of birds' nest soup and gram for gram are worth as much as silver. As soon as its nest is removed a bird will immediately build another. So, as long as this valuable harvest is properly controlled, the colonies will continue to flourish. These Bornean caves are among the biggest in the world and they're still getting bigger as each year rainwater eats away a little more limestone. But water in caves doesn't only erode. It also builds. This water is loaded with dissolved limestone and when it meets the air in the cave some of that is deposited as a mineral - calcite. As it builds up so the calcite forms decorations that hang from the ceiling - stalactites. Each drop leaves behind only a miniscule amount of calcite, but over time the process can produce some spectacular results. If the water seeps though the ceiling quickly, then the calcite is deposited on the floor of the cave and that creates stalagmites. Variations in water flow and the air currents produce an infinite variety of forms, but all are created by the same process - the slow deposition of dissolved limestone. And when stalactite meets stalagmite a column is born. Structures like these in North America's Carlsbad Cavern can take many thousands of years to develop. But sometimes the formations in a cave stop growing altogether. These flooded caves in Mexico have remained virtually unchanged for thousands of years. Since the last Ice Age they've become cut off from the outside world. Yet their impact on life on the surface has been huge. 500 years ago they supported one of the world's great civilizations the Maya. Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula has no rivers, lakes or streams so the Maya relied on the cenotes - the flooded entrances to the water-filled caves. These flooded shafts are the region's only source of open fresh water. The cenotes are, in effect, gigantic fresh water wells. Away from the life-giving rays of sunshine one might not expect to find plants. But in the darkness of the cave tunnels roots of giant tropical trees have pushed their way through cracks in the limestone to reach the flooded caverns. Without this water the Yucatan's forest could not grow so luxuriantly. The Maya knew that their lives depended on this water, but it's only with the help of today's technology that we've come to appreciate the full significance and scale of these flooded passageways. So far, more than 350 miles of underwater galleries in the Yucatan have been mapped, but still nobody yet knows the true extend of this subterranean waterworld. And with good reason. Underwater caving is notoriously dangerous. When the nearest exit may be hundreds of meters or more away, running out of air down here would be fatal. To avoid getting lost divers carry with them a spool of string. It becomes their lifeline - literally. The string also doubles as a measuring tape - a technique that has been used here, in Mexico, to chart the largest underwater cave in the world - all 100 miles of it. Cave exploration often requires you to push yourself through narrow gaps in the rock. Cavers call such places 'squeezes.' The tighter the squeeze, the greater the chance of damaging some vital life-support system. In these conditions a diver could easily become disorientated and that could be fatal. The flooded caverns can play tricks on you in other ways. What seems like air, isn't. It's just another kind of water. This is a halocline - a meeting of fresh and salt water. Fresh water from the jungle flows over the heavier salt water from the sea. The saltwater layer is extremely low in oxygen making it a particularly difficult place for animals to live. Yet some have managed it, like the remiped, one of the most ancient of all living crustaceans. The Maya understood the importance of the cenotes, but they could never have known that these flooded passageways were actually the beginning of subterranean rivers, all of which eventually flow out to the sea. Salt water, unlike fresh water, does not erode limestone, so most sea caves are created by the mechanical pounding of the waves. The rocky outcrops of New Zealand's Poor Knight Islands are riddled with sea caves and just like those in Borneo they have become important shelters for many species. After a day feeding in the open water vast shoals of demoiselle fish return to the caves, which they use as a refuge from predators. For these fish the caves are a night time retreat, but they're not the only commuters in here. There are other fish working to a different schedule. The big eyes are the equivalent of bats. Night feeders leave the cave each evening. And like all cave commuters they are most vulnerable at the scheduled time of departure. A bottleneck funnels these exiting bats into dense concentrations attracting the attention of others. The bats can detect the snakes using echolocation, but the snakes are literally in the dark - they can see nothing. The strikes seem to be largely hit-and-miss, but the snakes have a secret weapon. They can actually sense each bat flying past. Receptors in the snake's head pick up the heat given off by the flying bats, as this thermal image shows. To the snakes the bats are apparently glowing and this gives them something to aim at. This is the price that these cave commuters must pay for their daytime sanctuary on the ground. Small wonder then that there are other cave dwellers that stay put. Many caves are like islands - cut off from the outside world and from other caves. This isolation has resulted in the evolution of some various strange creatures. They are the cave specialists - troglodytes, animals that never emerge from the caves or see daylight. These troglodytes from Thailand are possibly the most specialized creatures on Earth for they live only in cave waterfalls. The entire population of these cave angel fish seems to be restricted to just two small caves. It's the same story with other troglodytes. There may well be less than a hundred Texas cave salamanders in the wild. And the Belizean white crab is another creature that is unique to just one cave system. Living in perpetual darkness they have all not only lost the pigment in their skin, but also their eyes. It takes thousands of generations for eyes to be lost, so these species must have been isolated for a very long time. But the blind salamander has other highly developed sensory organs. Receptors in their skin detect minute movements in the water made by its prey. External gills help it to breathe in water that is particularly low in oxygen. The cave angel fish feed on bacteria in the fast flowing water keeping their grip with microscopic hooks on their fins. Food is often in short supply and troglodytes like the crab have to survive on whatever washes into the cave from outside. The salamander might not encounter food for several months, so when something does come along it can't afford to miss it. It's astonishing that these extraordinary cave dwellers manage to survive at all. But one cave is so inhospitable that one would not expect it to contain any life whatsoever. The water flowing out of the Villa Luz cave in Mexico is actually colored white with sulphuric acid. Explorers entering this dangerous cave must wear respirators and carry monitors. Poisonous gases rise to fatal levels so quickly that an early warning system is essential. Bats survive by staying close to the skylights, but venturing deep into the cave is very dangerous indeed. The source of these toxic fumes lies several miles below. Hydrogen sulphide gas bubbles up from oil deposits in the earth's crust. It mixes with oxygen and the water, and forms sulphuric acid. These are not the sort of conditions in which you would expect to find fish, yet these cave mollies seem to thrive despite the acid and the low levels of oxygen. There is, in fact, more life here than anyone would think possible, but the biggest surprise is something altogether more bizarre. These strange stalactite-like formations are known, rather appropriately, as snotites, the drops dripping from the ends are sulphuric acid, strong enough to burn skin. The snotites are, in fact, vast colonies of bacteria, capable of going a centimeter a day. In this world without sunlight these bacteria extract energy from the hydrogen sulphide gas. Bacteria like these are known as extremofile because of their ability to survive in such extreme conditions. And these extremofiles play another important role in this cave. Surprisingly, they are the basis of a food chain which supports, amongst other creatures, the larvae of these midges. Villa Luz's ecosystem was certainly very remarkable, but cave explorers were soon to make an even more astonishing discovery. Beneath this arid landscape lies a subterranean wonderland. Without water one might not expect to find any caves, but beneath these rolling desert slopes in the United States lies one of the longest, deepest and most surprising caves in the world. Its secrets remained unknown until 1986, when cavers dug through several meters of loose rock to the bottom of this pit. They named the cave 'Lechuguilla' and since this discovery more than 120 miles of passageways have been mapped. When the first explorers descended, no-one guessed at the sheer size of this cave. But even that was not going to be the biggest surprise. Little did they realize that Lechuguilla would soon be regarded by cavers the world over as the most beautiful of all caves. They were about to discover some of the most exquisite formations ever seen underground. The walls were covered with the most delicate and fragile crystals. Many of these crystals were made of gypsum, a mineral that comes from limestone. And there was mile after mile of them. Water is the creator of most caves, but, unlike all other limestone caves, Lechuguilla's rock had not been eaten away by running rainwater. Something else was responsible. The only water Lechuguilla has are these wonderfully still clear pools. As the explorers went deeper into the cave, they came across whole galleries filled with the most unusual formations, like these 5-meter cones, frosted with the most delicate crystals. It was Lechuguilla's gypsum crystals that made scientists question how these caverns were formed. They discovered that Lechuguilla's limestone had actually been eaten away by sulphuric acid, cutting through literally miles of limestone. And when sulphuric acid dissolves limestone it leaves behind gypsum, the basis of Lechuguilla's remarkable formations. And there was one set, more than a mile from the surface, that almost defied belief. The Chandelier Ballroom was the ultimate discovery. With its six-meter long crystals it's surely the most bizarre cave chamber in the world. And the walls had one further surprise. Extremofile bacteria were found to be feeding on the rock itself. The discovery of life that exists without drawing any of its energy from the sun shows us once again how complex and surprising the underground world can be. Each year explorers chart over a hundred miles of new cave passages. But with half the world's limestone still to be explored, who knows how many Lechuguillas are still waiting to be discovered? A third of the land on our planet is desert. These great scars on the face of the Earth appear to be lifeless, but surprisingly none are. In all of them life manages somehow to keep a precarious hold. Not all deserts are hot. Fifty-mile-an-hour winds blowing in from Siberia bring snow to the Gobi Desert in Mongolia. From a summer high of 50 degrees centigrade the temperature in midwinter can drop to minus 40, making this one of the harshest deserts of all. Few animals can survive these extreme changes. Wild Bactrian camels, one of the rarest mammals on the planet. And perhaps the hardiest. Their biggest problem is the lack of water, particularly now, in winter, when the little there is is locked up as ice. Surprisingly, snow here never melts. The air is just too cold and too dry for it to do so. The sun's rays turn it straight into vapor. It evaporates. But it is the only source of water, so Bactrian camels eat it. Elsewhere in the world a camel at a waterhole can drink as much as 200 liters during a single visit. Here the strategy is to take little and often. And with good reason, for filling the stomach with snow could be fatal. The camels must limit themselves to the equivalent of just 10 liters a day. Winter is the time for breeding. This extraordinary performance is a male Bactrian camel's way of attracting the attention of a passing female. In summer the camels can't stray far from waterholes. But now, with mouthfuls of snow lying everywhere they can travel widely in search of mates. Today less than a thousand of these desert specialists remain in the wild. The Gobi, hostile though it is, is their last stronghold. There's no other desert quite like the Gobi, but why is this place a desert? There is one simple and massive cause - the Himalayas. Clouds blowing from the south hit this gigantic barrier. As they're forced upwards so they empty their moisture on the mountain slopes, leaving little for the land on the other side. From the space deserts are very conspicuous. Dunes of sand hundreds of miles long streak their surface. With no cloak of vegetation to conceal them strange formations are exposed in the naked rock. Africa's Sahara is the largest desert of all. It's the size of the United States and the biggest source of sand and dust in the entire world. Sandstorms like these appear without warning and reduce visibility for days over areas the size of Britain. Dromedaries, single-humped camels, take these storms in their stride. The heaviest sand rises only a few meters above the ground, but the dust can be blown 5,000 meters up into the sky. The ferocious wind, armed with grains of sand, is the agent that shapes all deserts. Reptiles have armored scaly skins that protect them from the stinging grains. For insects the bombardment can be very severe indeed. The only escape is below the surface. As the winds rise and fall, swallow and eddy so they pile the sand into dunes. These sand scenes can be hundreds of miles across. In Namibia the winds have built some of the biggest dunes in the world. Star dunes like these can be 300 meters high. Grains, swept up the flanks, are blown off the crests of the ridges so it's only the tops that are moving. The main body of these dunes may not have shifted for 5,000 years. Few rocks can resist the continuous blast of the sand carrying wind. These outcrops are standing in Egypt's White Desert. But they will not do so for much longer. They're being inexorably chiseled away and turned into more sand. Now lumps of heavily eroded rocks have been marooned in a sea of sand. These jagged pyramids a hundred meters tall were once part of a continuous rocky plateau. The blasting sand will eventually eliminate them altogether. The relentless power of the wind ensures that the face of a desert is continually changing. But there is one constant presence - the desert sun. The sun's heat and power to evaporate water has had a profound effect on the bodies and habits of everything that lives here. This sun potentially is a killer. And the red kangaroos must acknowledge that. Right now, while the sun is low, there's no immediate cause for concern. But this situation won't last long. Australia is the world's most arid continent with blistering daytime temperatures. Every hour the temperature rises by five degrees centigrade. Soon the heat will reach a critical point. Any kangaroo out in the open is in serious danger of overheating. In the full sun the temperature on the ground soars to 70 degrees. By midday the radiation is so intense they must take shelter. In the shade they're shielded from much of the sun's energy but their body temperature can still rise. So they lick saliva on to their forearms where there is a network of blood vessels close to the surface of the skin and, as the saliva evaporates, their blood is cooled. This thermal image shows just how effective the process is. The blue areas on the body are the cooler parts. As the saliva dries it has to be replaced and this is a real drain on the kangaroo's body fluids. Even in the shade the earth is baking hot so the kangaroos dig away the warmed topsoil to get at the cooler ground beneath. By staying in the shade and licking to control their body temperature kangaroos manage to get through the hottest part of the day without heat stroke. But for the majority of desert animals this strategy would not be enough for survival. The extraordinary ears of the fennec foxes of Africa radiate heat but the animals have another way of keeping cool. They spend their days underground and only emerge at sunset. Darkness brings huge changes. In the Sahara the temperature can drop as much as 30 degrees during the night, so it's cool enough to allow these desert fox cubs to play. All sorts of creatures now appear including some really unexpected ones. Toads have permeable skins and would quickly die from desiccation out in the daytime heat. It's only now that they can leave shelter. The same is true for scorpions, even though their shells are actually watertight. In fact, most small desert creatures are nocturnal. So it's only now that you can judge just how much life there can be in the desert. But moisture, lost even at night, has to be replaced sometime somehow and that problem dominates the lives of all desert dwellers. The Atacama in Chile. This is the driest desert in the world. Some parts may not see rain for fifty years and with such a record you'd expect the place to be completely barren. These are South America's camels, guanacos. They're very good at conserving moisture but they nonetheless need a regular supply of water. They get it partly from cactus flowers but that explanation raises another question. How do the cacti survive without rain? Hot winds suck all the moisture from the surface of the land. Clearly there must be something else that takes the place of rain. The secret is a cold sea current that runs parallel to the land. The cold water cools the moist warm air above it and that produces banks of fog. At the same time wind blowing on to the shore sweeps the fog inland. Before long the cacti are dripping with dew. The fog is so regular that moisture loving lichens are able to grow on the cacti and they absorb liquid like a sponge. In the land of almost no rain these precious drops are life-savers for many different creatures. Further inland the air remains so warm that its moisture does not condense so this slender strip of desert is virtually the only part of the Atacama where life can exist. Without the fog, this land, too, would be empty. The guanacos make the most of the dew but it will not remain for long. In an hour or two the sun will have burnt it off and dry the surface of the cacti. The Sonoran desert in Arizona is not quite so dry as the Atacama - some rain does fall. But it is infrequent and when it does arrive animals and plants have to be ready to make the most of it. And it's coming. When the summer monsoon blows in the giant saguaros, one of the biggest of all cacti, are ready to take full advantage of it. After a rainstorm the saguaro's long shallow root system sucks up the water and the pleats on its trunk enable it to expand rapidly. When full, a saguaro stem can store up to five tons of water and that's enough to see it through many months of drought. The trunks of these huge plants provide homes for the gila woodpecker. But birds are not the only animals to benefit from the presence of the cacti. During four weeks of the summer the saguaros bloom at night to attract visitors. The pollen and nectar with which these flowers are loaded attract long-nosed and long-tongued bats. The bats left Mexico a few days earlier to escape the heat of summer and are on their way north to the southern United States. To get there, they have to cross the Sonoran desert. But the desert is so big that for most of the year they would be unable to cross it. Now, with the saguaro in bloom, they can refuel on the way. So the saguaro's success in developing a way to store water is now crucial to most of the animals that live or even travel through this land. The scarcity of rain determined the shape of this icon of the desert but water, scarce thought it is, has also, like the wind, shaped the land itself. In the deserts of Utah ancient rivers flowing across sandstone country steadily widen their canyons until now the land between them has been reduced to spires and pinnacles. With little or no soil to retain the water on the surface of the land life here is scarce indeed. And when resources are limited, conflict is never far away. These are Nubian ibex and they are squaring up for a duel. And when trouble starts, a smart ibex knows that the best thing to do is to gain higher ground. These are actually subordinate male ibex, but their fights are nonetheless serious. Losing one might mean never getting the chance to breed ever. When competitors are evenly matched as they are here, duels can last for an hour. In this heat the effort is truly exhausting. But victory here will gain important ranking points on a male's way to the top. There's so much at stake that not all play fair. The battle has produced the winner, but the ultimate prize is not his yet. That currently belongs to the dominant male ibex. His rank earns him the loyalty of a harem of females and they follow him closely as he travels across this desert searching for food and water. He doesn't have to waste time looking for mates - they're his for the taking, so he can concentrate with them on keeping fit and healthy. Lizards are desert specialists. But here, their numbers are extraordinary. These crevices in South Africa contain the highest density of lizards in the world. They're called flat lizards for obvious reasons, and they flaunt their multi-colored bellies in territorial disputes. He's made his point, and now it's time to find some food. As the day warms up, the lizards move away from their cracks and head down to the bottom of the gorge. Their goal is the river. There is no food at the edge, but this desert river holds a secret. Each day blackfly rise from turbulent stretches of the river. This is what the lizards have come for. The black fly never land, so the lizards have to leap for their food. In one day each of these acrobatic little lizards may catch 50 flies. There are plenty of flies to go round, even with hundreds of lizards competing for them. Away from these rapids flat lizard populations are found in much smaller numbers. But here one unusual abundance has produced another. Deserts are created by the lack of water, but what actually kills animals here is not heat or thirst, but lack of food. So how on earth does a plant-eater this size survive in a place apparently totally devoid of vegetation? Elephants in Namibia are the toughest in Africa. And they need to be. What little food exists is so dispersed that these elephants walk up to 50 miles a day as they travel up the dry river channels searching for something to eat. At times the task looks truly helpless. Elephants may seem out of place in this landscape, but they're not the only ones. Amazingly, lions live here, too. In savannah country huge herds of games support prides containing 20 lions or more. But to live here lions have had to change their habits - prides are much smaller and their home ranges are very much bigger. And there's an added problem - their food is always on the move. Like the elephants, the lions must travel great distances to find enough to live on. But lions can't go everywhere - they won't attempt to cross this field of sand dunes and the oryx know it. The lions must wait for the oryx to leave the safety of the dunes, which eventually they must to find food and water. And then the lions will ambush them. The elephants have found some of their favorite food. Grasses are the staple diet of all elephants, but this herd concentrates on digging up the roots, which have more nutrition and moisture than the stems. It's the sort of behavior that can make all the difference in a place of serious shortages. Yet all this can change in an instant. The fortunes of many deserts are ruled by distant rains. This water fell as rain in mountains more than a hundred miles away. It's known as a flash flood and called that because the water may run for just a single day. It's an event that only happens once or twice a year at the most. The sandy riverbed acts like a giant strip of blotting paper sucking up the water as soon as it appears. But every square meter of soil moistened by this river will increase the chances of survival for those that live here. Waterholes are filled temporarily. Elsewhere in Africa elephants drink every day, but the lack of water here means that desert elephants can only refill their tanks once every four or five days. Within a week the flash flood has produced a flush of green, more than enough to draw the oryx out of the dunes. It's a rare chance for them to build up their food reserves. The flood has made life easier for the lions, too. The flesh of this oryx will keep the family going for a week at the most. But for a while the hunting will be easier, now that river channel has turned green. The good times for lions and oryx are brief, but these are the short moments that make it possible to live in deserts the year round. Death Valley is the hottest place on Earth. Yet even this furnace can be transformed by water. A single shower can enable seeds that have lain dormant for 30 years or more to burst into life. And there hasn't been a bloom like this one for a century. The periods of boom in Death Valley are short. But they're just frequent enough to keep life ticking over. A sudden flush of vegetation is what every desert dweller waits for, and when it happens they must make the most of it. There is no other species on the planet that responds as quickly and as dramatically to the good times as the desert locust. Eggs that have remained in the ground for 20 years begin to hatch. The young locusts are known as hoppers, for at this stage they're flightless. They find new feeding grounds by following the smell of sprouting grass. Normally it takes four weeks for hoppers to become adults, but when the conditions are right as now their development switches to the fast track. As the vegetation in one place begins to run out the winged adults release pheromones - scent messages, which tell others in the group that they must move on. And when groups merge, they form a swarm. An adult locust eats its entire body weight every day, and a whole swarm can consume literally hundreds of tons of vegetation. They have to keep on moving. The swarm travels with the wind - it's the most energy-saving way of flying. Following the flow of wind means that they're always heading toward areas of low pressure, places where wind meets rain and vegetation starts to grow. As they fly, swarms join up with other swarms to form gigantic plagues several billions strong and as much as 40 miles wide. They will consume every edible thing that lies in their path. This is one of planet Earth's greatest spectacles. It's rarely seen on this scale and it won't last long. Once the food is gone, the steady roar of a billion beating locust wings will once again be replaced by nothing more than the sound of the desert wind. Both poles of our planet are covered with ice. They're the largest and most demanding wildernesses of all. Nowhere else on Earth is seasonal change so extreme. It causes the ice to advance and retreat every year and all life here is governed by that. When the first polar explorers headed south giant cathedrals of ice marked their entry into uncharted territory. Passing the towering spires they must've wondered what unearthly sights lay in store. As they battled on the ice became increasingly dominant but nothing could have prepared them for the ice world that finally loomed into view. Terra incognita - the unknown land. At the southernmost extreme of our planet the continent of Antarctica is as large as the United States of America. Ninety percent of all the world's ice is found here. This frozen world is largely deserted until the start of spring. Adelie penguins in a hurry. The clock is ticking. Instead of waiting for the summer melt the new arrivals hasten south over the frozen sea. They have come here to breed but polar summers are so short they must be in position before the thaw starts. As the sea ice retreats life can journey farther south. Antarctic waters are so rich that visitors come from far and wide to harvest them. Vast numbers of chinstrap penguins come ashore to breed. No bird will lay their eggs directly onto ice so bare rock is a vital commodity. The best patches are worth the climb. The clifftops are soon stained pink with the droppings of tens of thousands of nesting penguins. Only in a land almost entirely covered in ice could bare rock be reckoned an oasis. Some will travel into the heart of the continent to find it. These are noon attacks the exposed peaks of vast mountain ranges buried in ice over a mile deep. The eerie silence here is only broken in spring. The snow petrels have arrived and are courting. Antarctic petrels now join the most southerly colony on Earth. The birds have flown inland for over three hundred miles to reach this breeding site. Once their eggs have hatched they'll be forced repeatedly to make the 600 mile round trip to gather food in the ocean. First though valuable nesting places must be defended from property thieves. After laying their eggs the petrels take time out to clean their plumage. The south polar skua is a formidable opportunist but the skuas have not chanced upon the petrels they've been waiting for them. These birds do not need to go to the ocean for their food. The skuas can survive further south than any other predator by exploiting the petrels' desperate need for bare rock. Even at the height of summer less than 3% of Antarctica is free of ice and nearly all of that exposed rock is found in one place the Antarctic Peninsula. It's long arm extends further north than the rest of the continent, so spring arrives here first. The thaw unlocks sheltered bays that provide refuge from the relentless battering of the southern ocean. In the depths something stirs... Humpback whales. They have travelled over 5000 miles to reach these waters. The whales are harvesting krill shrimp like creatures that begin to swarm here as soon as the ice retreats. Diving into the heart of the swarm teams of whales spiral around each other in close coordination. Now they turn and blasting air from their blowholes and ascend towards their prey. The krill becomes concentrated as the spiralling net of bubbles draws inwards. The team of whales work around the clock for the bloom is short lived. Summer is already fading and the whales will soon be forced north as winter returns. The sun's influence diminishes and the ocean starts to freeze. The greatest seasonal change on our planet is underway. The ice grows at an extraordinary rate advancing two and a half miles a day. In a matter of weeks the continent effectively doubles in size. Life flees from Antarctica... but one creature is just arriving. Every winter Emperor penguins leave the comfort of their ocean home and begin a remarkable journey. They head towards their breeding grounds almost a hundred miles inland. Eventually the emperor penguins reach the place where they were hatched an area sheltered by icebergs trapped in the frozen ocean. Here they will raise the next generation but first each must find a mate. Males begin to serenade and if a female replies they pair up, posing like statues. New couples quickly form a strong bond they seem oblivious to the noisy crowd around them. To cement their relationship the male steps out with his female. The brief courtship complete there isn't a moment to loose. With so much pressure to perform any male would struggle to stay on top. Several weeks later and it seems that most couplings were successful but producing the egg has taken it's toll. The females no longer have the energy to incubate. The male takes over. It's still minus 20 degrees centigrade, so the transfer must be done quickly or else the egg will freeze. With no bare rock to nest on the male tucks the egg into a special pouch where he can keep it warm. It requires an extraordinary piece of teamwork. Driven by hunger, the exhausted females now return to the ocean on their own repeating the epic journey they made with the males only a month before. Now the sun barely appears above the horizon. As the day shortens, it's warmth is withdrawn from the continent. With the females gone the colony undergoes a strange transformation. The males shuffle into groups, their eggs still tucked away above their feet. They lock together in tightly packed huddles as they struggle to keep warm. Speeding up the action reveals how these huddles constantly shift and change as each penguin works it's way towards the warmer interior. Crammed into this scrum, the birds are remarkably good natured, but they have to be. If the huddle breaks even for a moment, precious heat escapes. It's imperative they reform as quickly as possible for only by as acting as one can the males withstand the elements, and protect their eggs. But their greatest test lies ahead. As winter advances, frequent blizzards drive the temperature down. It's now 60 degrees below zero. The birds at the edge of the huddle bear the brunt of the hundred mile an hour winds and so provide shelter to those taking their turn in the middle. Abandoned by the sun the males are left alone with their eggs to face the coldest darkest winter on Earth. At the northern extreme of our planet the sun rises for the first time in months, illuminating a very different ice world. Unlike Antarctica, the Arctic is a vast frozen sea surrounded by land. Here winter is coming to an end but this bleak wilderness remains locked in ice. Eider ducks break the silence. They have stayed here braving the northern winter, instead of flying south to warmer climes. Flocks forty thousand strong sweep across the frozen wastes. They all have the same goal a polinear, a permanent hole in the sea ice kept open throughout the winter by strong ocean currents. This unusual duck pond provides an overnight sanctuary and when day breaks a rare chance to feed. Just ten meters beneath the ice, the sea floor is carpeted with dense mussel beds. These can only be reached during a brief lull in the currents. The ducks must quickly prise the mussels free before the tide starts to turn. The window of opportunity is short. As the current begins to build it's up up and away. These permanent holes in the ice provide seafood throughout winter. The diners attract others. In the Arctic, any breach in the icy barrier can be a lifeline. Musk oxen create their own. These giants have the strength to smash through the frozen crust to graze on the vegetation below. These icebreakers create an opening for other over winterers. Flocks of ptarmigan make unusual grazing companions for the musk oxen whose entourage grows throughout the day. This odd assembly of vegetarians doesn't go unnoticed. An arctic fox. The musk oxen have recently given birth. For the fox, it's a chance to scavenge but half a ton of mad hairy cow is not to be trifled with. The calves are born well before the spring melt giving them a head start when summer finally arrives. It must get to grips with it's new ice world benign one minute life threatening the next. Even in spring winds chill to the bone. The calf must stay close to it's mother to avoid getting lost in the sudden blizzard. Arctic wolves. In the whiteout, the threat is almost impossible to detect but the musk oxen instinctively retreat to higher ground. Forming a defensive ring around their calves the adults present a barricade that few hunters could breach but the wolves need not risk injury today. A calf has been left behind in the panic. With each passing day the sun climbs higher in the sky and it's rays strike the Arctic more directly. It's spring and new life stirs. The polar bear cubs emerge from the den in which they were born. Their mother stretches her legs after five months under the snow. They're just two months old and instinctively follow her lead. A steep slope makes the best site for a den but it's a tricky place to take your first steps. It may look like fun, but this is serious training for the task ahead. There's no food on the slopes and the family will need to head out across the frozen sea, before the mother's milk runs dry. Two weeks later they're ready. Out on the sea ice the female can hunt for seals but it will take all her mothering skills to keep her cubs safe in this dangerous world of ice. The annual melt has begun. This is a challenging time for the bear family. One out of every two cubs do not survive their first year out on the ice. As the sun's influence increases, the sea ice seems to take on a life of it's own. Glacial melt waters pour from the land mingling with the sea and speeding up the thaw. The seascape is in constant flux, as broken ice is moved on by winds and currents. The ice is becoming too weak to support a male polar bear. He attempts to spread his weight but the ice that has supported him all winter is rapidly disintegrating. Each year as the climate warms the Arctic holds less ice. This is a disaster for polar bears. Without it's solid platform, they can't hunt the seals they need in order to survive. This may be a glimpse of the unstable future faced by this magnificent creature. As the ice disappears seabirds return to the high Arctic. Little auks arrive in their millions. In some ways these birds are the penguins of the north. The seek bare rock on which to lay their eggs and they look rather like penguins too. Unlike Antarctica, the Arctic can be reached by land based predators which is why little auks have kept the ability to fly. They use scree slopes to protect their eggs, burrowing up to a meter beneath the rocks. At the height of summer the sun never sets but just skims the horizon before rising again. Migrants return to the Arctic from far and wide. They've come to make the most of the brief flush of food and to produce their young. Sandhill cranes have travelled all the way from New Mexico. Their chicks join the growing band of youngsters exploring the tundra. For a few months each year the Arctic becomes the land of the midnight sun and twenty four hours of daylight allow animals to feed around the clock. The arctic fox finally has enough food to raise her large family. If you choose to nest in the open you must be prepared for a fight. Arctic skuas will see off any trespassers even large vegetarians. The male polar bear's ice world has finally vanished beneath him. While the female is still kept on land by her dependent cubs the male can take to the sea in search of food. Ducking and diving, he hopes to ambush seals resting on the remaining fragments of ice. In these new surroundings he is a surprisingly adept swimmer. Once an extremely rare sight polar bears have recently been seen over sixty miles from the shore. There is now no turning back for this bear. He's forced to head out into deeper water. His giant front paws help him to fight the ocean currents. He seems at home in the sea but he cannot swim indefinitely. He will drown if he doesn't find land somewhere in this vast ocean. Walruses are now gathering on low lying islands. They gave birth on sea ice but with this platform now gone, they need a new place to haul out and nurse their young. After several days at sea the male bear finally makes landfall drawn by pungent smells emanating from the island. By the end of summer the bear has lost half his weight. With the ice long gone he is forced onto land in search of food. There will be no easy meals on this island. Walruses are the largest seals in the world. They weight over a ton and are armed with tusks a meter long. Exhausted from his swim the bear must regain his strength. The next day a sea fog shrouds the island. The walruses sense that they're in danger. Using the fog as cover the bear approaches the herd. The adults close ranks around their young, presenting a wall of blubber and hide. He tests the barrier but it stands firm. It appears that the world's largest land carnivore has met his match. There must be a chink in the armor somewhere. Not here. This female walrus is shielding her pup, if can just prise her off. The bears claws and teeth can't penetrate her thick hide. With the herd retreating to water the bear must move quickly. Having failed with one he heads straight for another. The chance of his first meal in months is slipping away. He seems increasingly desperate. It's now or never. He must avoid the stabbing tusks if he's to win. The flailing walrus is immensely powerful and drags the bear away from the shallows towards the safety of the herd. It slips from his grasp. Only at the height of summer when bears are on the verge of starvation will they risk attacking such dangerous prey. It was a gamble that this bear took, and lost. The stab wounds he received from the walrus are so severe that he can barely walk. The walruses are calm again seemingly aware that the injured bear no longer poses a threat to them or their young. Unable to feed this bear will not survive. If the global climate continues to warm and the Arctic ice melts sooner each year it's certain that more bears will share this fate. At the southern end of our planet fiery ribbons are illuminating the winter skies. The aurora australis. This light brings no warmth to the male penguins who are still huddling defying the coldest conditions on the planet. Their ordeal is drawing to a close. Thirty days after it last set the sun rises once more on Antarctica. Their appalling trials have all been for this. Each father has just one meal left inside him. He's been saving it all winter. This single feeding will sustain the chicks for a few more days but the males have not eaten for nearly four months. If they do not eat soon they and their chicks will die. But there is hope on the horizon. The females are returning, and their bellies are full with fish. As they approach, waves of excitement ripple through the huddle. Each female calls to her mate, and he, recognizing her song, trumpets back. Reunited, at last. The mother feeds her chick for the first time. She's keen to start parenting but the father needs persuading to surrender the chick he's been caring for all winter. He must now put his chick at risk. In these temperatures it could freeze in seconds. The male will have to let go. Eventually, the transfer to the mother is safely made. The chicks grow quickly on a diet of fish and squid. Soon they're keen to explore, but always with mother in tow. This chick is less fortunate. It's mother has not returned to claim it. Another orphan is searching for a new family, but this female already has a chick of her own. Some orphans receive too much mothering from penguins whose own chicks have not survived. The urge to parent is so strong, that they will compete with one another to adopt any chick they find. Many of these squabbles will end in tragedy as the poor chick is trampled to death. Those chicks that do have parents quickly learn survival skills. Even in spring, they must huddle together for warmth just as their fathers did in the depths of winter. A group of chicks has got lost in the blizzard. Cold and disorientated they search for the colony. It will not be long before the storm claims it's first victims. By early summer, the chicks are surprisingly well developed and now look ready to take on the world. Those that survived their first year have the best possible start in life thanks to the extraordinary hardships endured by their parents. Parents who battled with the Antarctic winter, and won. In the Arctic the two polar bear cubs are now independent of their mother and they briefly reunite where their home ranges overlap. Their time together will be fleeting. Most of their lives are now spent alone wandering the vast tracts of frozen ocean. Following their mother, has prepared them for life at the pole an ever changing land ruled by ice. Whether they are ready for the bigger changes that have begun to shape the ice worlds of our planet remains to be seen. Vast open plains. Immense spaces. Eerie silence but any feeling of emptiness is an illusion. The plains of our planet support the greatest gatherings of wildlife on Earth. At the heart of all that happens here is a single living thing. Grass. This miraculous plant covers a quarter of all the lands of the Earth. Grasslands exist where ever there is a little rain, but not enough to sustain the forests. Some are huge. The Central Asian Steppe alone extends one third of the way around our planet. It's summer and eagles effortlessly cruise the thermals scanning the ground beneath for signs of prey. In the distant reaches of Outer Mongolia one of the planet's great migrations is underway. Few people ever see this extraordinary annual event. Mongolian gazelle. Two million are thought to live here but no one really knows. For much of the time they're scattered through this vast landscape but once a year they come together to have their young. Nearly all will give birth within the next ten days. Out in the open, communal calving is the safest way to have young. With so many pairs of eyes keeping watch it's almost impossible for predators to sneak up. There are no bushes, no trees, there's only one thing to hide behind, grass and it's not very effective. Predators also have a hard time raising their young on open grassland. Without trees eagles have to nest directly on the ground. All inhabitants of the Great Plains are exposed to the elements. Fire sparks panic in the herd. Gazelles are born to run, and even young calves easily outpace the flames if they can avoid being trampled. With nothing to stand in it's way the blaze consumes anything that can't flee. Huge quantities of grass, valuable food have been lost and with it the old and the weak. The gazelles move on to new pastures and leave the desolation behind them. From the ashes rises the phoenix. Grass the incredible survivor. Because it grows from a protected part at the base of its stems, grass is almost indestructible. Able to repair and reproduce itself rapidly it covers more of the Earth's land than any other plant and feeds more wildlife than any other. Red billed quelea. One and a half billion swarm across the savannas of Africa. These are the most numerous birds on Earth. Some flocks are so vast, that they could take five hours to pass overhead. Only grass can feed plagues of these proportions. The ravenous hordes devour the seeds and the leaves and stems are cropped by great herds of antelope. The East African savannas alone sustain nearly two million wildebeest. They trim the grass down to it's roots leaving little in their wake but within days the plant will recover and continue to sustain the biggest herds on Earth. Grass is not confined to the tropics. It manages to grow even in the bitter conditions of the Arctic. Beyond the limits of the last tree the planet is barren and ice locked. The frozen no man's land at the end of the Earth. But, for a short time each year, the long dark winter releases it's grip. Temperatures rise, and grass that has lain dormant and frozen throughout the winter sprouts once more. Green returns to the Arctic. The receding ice reveals an immense flat plain, the size of Australia. This is the Arctic tundra. It's a desolate silent wilderness but it's about to change. Snow geese. They winter along the Gulf of Mexico and in spring they fly the entire length of North America to reach the Arctic tundra. Five million birds make this journey every year. Their marathon migration is almost three thousand miles long and has taken them three months. Exhausted and starving, they touch down inside the Arctic Circle back at their traditional breeding grounds, at last. Snow geese pair for life. As soon as couples arrive, they must stake a claim to a nesting patch. Ideal sites are in short supply and quarrelsome neighbors are all around. Disputes can be vicious. Point taken. It's a long way to travel, but for a short period the tundra is the ideal place for a grazer. The grass grows vigorously during the short intense summer and the are fewer predators than farther south. Here, geese can nest on the ground in relative safety nonetheless this female must incubate her eggs for three weeks and throughout this time she will be very vulnerable. An Arctic fox surveys the colony. She's been waiting for the geese all winter. Sneaking up unnoticed is impossible. Perhaps fortune will favor the bold. The colony is well defended. There are no easy pickings here. She's driven away from every nest, but hunger compels her to continue. There are more eggs here than she can possibly eat now but the nesting season is short so she stashes much of her plunder for later in the year when all the geese have gone. Further south, other bigger predators prowl the tundra. Wolves. For them, finding food on the plains is an even greater challenge. Not only is their prey seasonal it's also hard to find. They've been searching for days without a sign. Somewhere in this immense landscape there is food for them. This is it. Caribou. Travelling thirty miles a day they can cover nearly two thousand miles during the summer months. The wolves will starve if they don't find the caribou but it's no easy task to locate prey that never stops traveling. Biting flies and the quest for new pasture drives the migration ever onwards. A wolf has finally picked up the trail. The caribou are close. At last, a chance. The hunt is on. The wolf panics the herd, and the weak and young are singled out. A calf is separated from it's mother. At the goose colony it's high summer and eggs are hatching. The young all emerge within a day or two. A marvel of timing. The colony is now home to a million goslings. The fox is still gathering all she can get. Sometimes one mouth simply isn't enough. One will have to do. Not all food is stored. Some is needed right now. She has seven hungry cubs to feed. As their appetites grow, the mother must work tirelessly to raise her family. Only fat healthy cubs will survive the Arctic winter. The vast majority of the goslings are still flourishing. Their parents lead them down to the safety of the water as soon as they're strong enough to make the journey. For the foxes boom time has come to an end but the mother has given her cubs the best possible start in life. The geese will continue grazing the tundra until the summer ends, and they're forced to head south for the winter. At these latitudes the Sun's rays are week and grass can only grow here for a few months a year but further south summers are longer and the grasslands flourish. The prairies of North America. This rich pasture once supported the greatest herds ever seen on our planet. There were once sixty million bison but no animal is immune to intensive hunting by man or the destruction of it's habitat and a century ago the bison were reduced to barely a thousand. Now, thanks to rigorous protection, the species is recovering. The growing season is long and the grass here can support herds all year around. Male bison weigh in at one ton. In high summer the bulls are fat from the rich grazing and in prime condition but only a few will mate. Exactly which few is about to be decided. On temperate plains around the world summer is a time for growth and reproduction. Now the grass produces it's flowers. New colors also come to the plains. The northern flowering is mirrored by the grasslands of the southern hemisphere. And nowhere is more impressive than on the velt of South Africa. Not all temperate plains are so rich and colorful in the summer. This is midsummer on the Tibetan Plateau the highest great plain in the world. Despite the conditions, grass survives, and in sufficient quantities to support the highest of all grazing herds those of the wild yak. Even in summer life is hard temperatures rarely rise above freezing, and the air is thin. It's also exceptionally dry for one very big reason the Himalayas. The great mountain range acts as a barrier preventing clouds moving in from the south and this casts a giant rain shadow that leaves Tibet high and dry. Grass clings to life even as desiccating winds remove what little moisture remains in the soil. So long as grass can survive, so can grazers. Wild ass. The males are fighting to win territories those that hold the best, are more likely to attract a herd of females. It's a frisky business. That counts as a victory but he can't assume the females will actually turn up. Female asses are mysterious creatures. They come and go as they please and much of their behavior seems unfathomable to an outsider. They're the great nomads of the plateau and will often trek vast distances across these parched plains in search of oases. But when they do find paradise they're liable to feed and drink for just a few hours and then head back to the dust for no apparent reason. Wild ass are the most conspicuous pioneers of this high frontier but the most numerous grazer in Tibet lives underground. Pika A relative of the rabbit. It too feeds on grass. On the exposed plateau pikas never stray far from their burrows but even so, squatters will move in given half a chance. While ground peckers and snow finches can be a nuisance they're worth tolerating,because they provide a valuable early warning system. The bizarre Tibetan fox. The pika's nemesis. When stalking, it keeps below the skyline perhaps helped by it's curious body shape. But why the square head? In summer, the Tibetan plateau heats up drawing in warm wet air from the south but the water never arrives. As the moist air approaches it's forced upwards by the Himalayas and condenses into huge rain clouds. These clouds drop all their water on the southern side of the mountains. The very peaks that keep Tibet dry are responsible for the monsoon rains falling farther south, and the greening of India. Here, soaked by rain and bathed in tropical sun grass reaches it's full potential. Elephant grass is the tallest in the world. Grass that towers over an elephant, can conceal all sorts of surprises. The male lesser florican. It's hard work getting noticed when you go courting in the high grass. The long grass plains of tropical India are home to some of the largest grass eating mammals on our planet... and some of the smallest. Pygmy hogs are no bigger than rabbits. They're the tiniest and rarest of all wild pigs. The female is busy collecting grass but not for eating. She's building a nest. Each piglet may be small enough to fit in the palm of a hand but she does have ten. This is how grass can grow given unlimited sunshine and water but on most tropical plains across our planet the wet season is followed by a dry one. On the African savannas, grazers are marching in search of grass and water. Without rain, these plains can become dust bowls. Grass can now loose it's hold. Elephants are in immediate danger. They must drink almost daily. Driven on by thirst, they march hundreds of miles across the parched plains. Relying on memory, the matriarchs lead their families to those special water holes that saved them in previous years. This one still has water but they must share what remains with desperately thirsty animals of all kinds. These are tense times. The elephants dominate the water hole but as night falls the balance of power will shift. Thirsty herds continue to arrive throughout the night. It's a cooler time to travel. In the darkness the tables turn. The elephant's night vision is little better than our own but lions have much more sensitive eyes. The cats are hungry and the elephants seem to sense it. Lions don't usually hunt elephants, but desperate times require desperate measures. This herd contains calves easier targets. But how to reach them? The adults encircle their young. It's an impenetrable wall of grey. A few exhausted stragglers are still arriving. One of them is alone. But it's too big for the lions to tackle. This one looks a little smaller. A solitary lion stands no chance but the whole pride is here. There are thirty of them, and they're specialist elephant hunters. This elephant will feed the whole pride for at least a week. Elephants know these drinking holes are dangerous, but they have no choice. The dramas that play out here are a savage reminder of how important water is for all life on these plains. As the dry season finally draws to a close Africa's baked savannas undergo a radical change. Rain sweeps across the continent and grass, the great survivor, rises again and the herds return. For months they've been scattered over huge areas, clinging to existence around tiny water holes. Now, the good times are back. A few African savannas are very special. Here, rain water from far and wide flows across the flat plains. Grass is submerged but still it grows. Flooded, burnt, baked and frozen grass can withstand it all. After six months of drought, grass replaces dust over great areas. Fresh new shoots draw animals from great distances. Many undertake epic migrations to catch the boom time. Some resourceful animals live here all the year round. Baboons are permanent residents but they have to change their behavior if they are to gather what they need on the newly flooded plains. There's plenty to eat but getting to it can be a little uncomfortable. New water poses problems for the youngsters but they know where to find a dry seat. A juicy snail is ample recompense for sodden paws. Having survived the dry barren times animals can now reap the rewards. On this seasonal planet, the great plains are lands of feast and famine. At their peak they support the greatest gatherings of wildlife found anywhere on Earth. This is our planet's hothouse. The jungle. The tropical rainforest. Forests like these occupy only three percent of the land yet they're home to over half of the world's species. But how do so many different kinds of plants and animals find the space here to live alongside one another?On the dark, humid forest floor the jungle appears to be lifeless. Often the only signs of life are what you hear. A male blue bird of paradise is advertising for a mate. It's quite a performance but he's not the only bird of paradise here keen to make an impression. There are nearly forty different kinds on the island of New Guinea each with a display seemingly more bizarre than the rest. A riflebird of paradise. Like many jungle animals, birds of paradise avoid competing with each other and these do so by living in different parts of this jungle covered island. The six plumed bird of paradise displays in his special clearing, on the forest floor. The magnificent bird of paradise favors the low branches of bushes. His female is modestly dressed. The male has a good set of lungs but he'll have to do more than flutter his eyelids, if he wants to impress her. It'll all depend on his performance. The females may be dull looking but they're very picky and it's time for a really close inspection. His right side looks fine... but what about his left?Pretty impressive, but is he magnificent enough?Oh dear. Her departure says it all. Generations of choosy females have driven the evolution of these remarkable displays. The more extravagant a male is, the more likely he'll be noticed. New Guinea lies in a warm tropical belt that girdles our planet around the equator. With abundant rainfall and twelve hours of daylight three hundred and sixty five days a year, it's here that rainforests flourish. Surprisingly only two percent of the sunlight filters down to the forest floor. Down here seedlings struggle to grow but the gloom is not eternal. The death of a forest giant is always saddening but it has to happen if the forest is to remain healthy. The sudden blaze of sunlight will bring life to the forest floor. A single hectare of rainforest may contain as many as 250 species of tree. That's nearly ten times the number that grow in Britain and the thirst for light triggers a race for a place in the sun. There's no time to waste. A seed that may have fallen only a few days ago, now bursts through the leaf litter. With so many competitors, getting a good start is critical but each plant has it's own particular strategy for making the most of this rare opportunity. The seeds of hardwoods are quick to germinate but, like the fabled tortoise, their strategy is to be slow and steady. Vines and other climbers put all their energy into rapid vertical growth, rather than girth though they'll need to be well supported. The climbers' strategy looks chaotic but there's method in their madness. Their growing tips circle like lassoes, searching out anchors for their spindly stems. They put coils in their tendrils so that if their support moves, they will stretch and not snap. But the frontrunners at this stage, the first to fill the clearing, are pioneers like the macarangas. Their immense leaves capture huge amounts of sunlight, so fueling their growth. As a result the macarangas grow a remarkable eight meters a year surging ahead of almost all their rivals. In the race for the top spot hundreds will start yet few will ever reach the finishing line, their growth cut short by the diminishing light. In less than four years, the gap will have gone but that's not the end of the race. The ultimate winners are the tortoises, the slow and steady hardwoods. When the short lived pioneers have fallen it's the hardwoods that take their place, and a fifty meter giant, like this one, may keep it's place in the sun for another two hundred years. At the top, is the canopy, the engine room of the jungle. It's up here that most of the animal life in the rainforest can be found. But despite the apparent abundance of vegetable food, gathering it is seldom easy. With no real seasons each tree flowers or fruits at a different time of the year which means that food is very widely spaced. Monkeys, like these tamarinds, must search the canopy for all kinds of food if they're to survive. but across the world's rainforests there's one type of fruiting tree that always delivers, the fig. Wherever they grow, figs are a magnet for the great diversity of animals. In the Amazon, the first to appear are the spider monkeys. These large primates are big fig eaters. But they won't have the tree to themselves for long. Others will want a share. like the diminutive emperor tamarinds. The tamarinds love figs too, but being petite means they're easily scared off. Squirrel monkeys are also small but they have strength in numbers. Their timeshare on the tree may be short, so their tactics are more smash and grab. Capuchin monkeys are the bully boys in these forests and they want the ripe figs for themselves. Figs are one of the few trees that fruit the year round so when other food is scarce, these fruits are always available somewhere or other. Even for leaf eaters, like howler monkeys the ripe figs are just too good to miss. And howlers are too big for the capuchins to chase off. Figs are so popular, that as many as 44 different kinds of bird and monkey have been seen working a shift system on a single tree. Because fruiting trees are so valuable, many monkeys are territorial. And if you live in the treetops there's perhaps no better way of staking your claim to a territory, than this. The calls of the siamang gibbons begin as a duet between the dominant male and female. The rest of their families soon join in, and it results in a frenzy of activity. The calls can carry over a mile, and their message is clear. They tell any neighboring siamangs this is our territory. Keep out. Up here the calls of siamang gibbons seem to dominate the airwaves but with the jungle's incredible diversity there are countless others trying to be heard too. Every layer seems to beat to a different tune. In the early morning the forest's chorus is particularly rich. Sounds travel further in the cooler air. But few calls can penetrate as far through the dense vegetation as this one the deep bass solo of a male orangutan. In the middle of the day little stirs in the jungle and the hot dense air muffles the sound. As the afternoon wears on, a different set of players begin to warm up. Insects work in harmony, timing their calls to fall between the notes of others. Many singers stick to precise schedules and right on cue the six o'clock cicada. Night brings out a whole new orchestra. The cacophony of competing calls seems deafening to us but frogs ears are tuned to hear only the calls of their own kind. The songs of courtship echo from all around. Male gliding leaf frogs leap from the treetops. To slow their descent, they use their huge webbed feet as parachutes. These large tree frogs spend most of their lives in the high canopy and only come down when it's time to breed. Once settled, they begin to serenade their unseen females. Now it's time for the females to make their move. There's no shortage of suitors, but this female has already made her choice. She's heading towards the loudest call, because loud calls come from big frogs and big is best, but to reach him she must run the gauntlet of a gang of smaller suitors. Their only chance of mating is to make a sneaky interception. He's scored. But with more females arriving all the time, it's not over until the fat frog stops singing. Feet, so vital for gliding, are now put to other uses. Two's company, three's inconvenient but in any case, all male frogs are equipped with dry thumbs which enable them to get a vice like grip on their moist partners. It's a case of first come first served. Living in such a humid environment, means jungle frogs are less tied to puddles and pools and these even lay their eggs out of water. There's little chance of them drying out and up here they're safer from predators. Surprisingly, it doesn't rain every day in the rainforest but more still falls here than anywhere else on Earth. On average, over two meters a year. A single tree can suck up hundreds of tons of water each year. But the trees can't use all this water so, much of it returns to the air as vapor, forming mist and clouds. In the Amazon, the largest unbroken stretch of rainforest in the world, half of all the rainwater that falls, comes from clouds produced by the trees themselves. With so much rain, it's not surprising that many of the worlds largest rivers are found in rainforests. Inside the forest, the high humidity creates the perfect conditions for a strange world, where life is built on decay. Amoeba like slime molds cruise the surface, feeding on bacteria and rotting vegetation. Fungi also flourish on decay. These are the fruiting bodies of the fungi, the only visible sign of a vast underground network of fungal filaments. In temperate forests, the buildup of leaf litter creates rich stores of nutrients. That however, doesn't happen here. Nutrients that reach the soil are leeched out by the rain but fungi are connected to tree roots by their underground filaments and by quickly consuming the dead they help to recycle crucial minerals straight back into the trees. And this recycling happens faster here, than anywhere else on the planet. There are thought to be nearly a million different types of fungi in the tropics. The vast majority still unknown to science. But one thing's for certain without fungi, rainforests could not exist. Nothing goes to waste in the rainforest. The fungi become food for others like these beetle larvae. Finding the fungus isn't a problem for the grubs since their caring parents actually show them the way. Incredibly, 80% of all insects live in jungles fewer more successful than the ants. There can be 8 million individuals in a single hectare. but jungle ants don't have it all their own way. These bullet ants are showing some worrying symptoms. Spores from a parasitic fungus called cordyceps have infiltrated their bodies and their minds. It's infected brain directs this ant upwards then, utterly disorientated, it grips a stem with it's mandibles. Those afflicted, that are discovered by the workers are quickly taken away and dumped far away from the colony. It seems extreme, but this is the reason why. Like something out of science fiction the fruiting body of the cordyceps erupts from the ant's head. It can take three weeks to grow and when finished, the deadly spores will burst from it's tip then, any ant in the vicinity will be in serious risk of death. The fungus is so virulent, it can wipe out whole colonies of ants and it's not just ants that fall victim to this killer. There are literally thousands of different types of cordyceps fungi and remarkably, each specializes on just one species but these attacks do have a positive effect on the jungle's diversity. Since parasites like these stop any one group of animal getting the upper hand. The more numerous a species becomes, the more likely it'll be attacked by it's nemesis a cordyceps fungus. With so much competition, jungles have become the home of the specialist. Now this animal, in the island of Borneo, is one of the most unusual. It's a colugo, or flying lemur, though this is something of a misnomer as it doesn't actually fly and it certainly isn't a lemur in fact nobody's quite sure who it's closest relative is. The colugo depends on a diet of young leaves and to find enough of them, it must move from tree to tree. The leaves are not very nutritious, but then, getting around doesn't use much energy. In a single night, a colugo might have to travel as far as two miles but that task is made easier by it's superior gliding skills. The secret of success in the competitive jungle is specializing and this has led to the evolution of some very intimate relationships between plants and animals. These are pitcher plants also from Borneo. Adapted to living in very low nutrient soils the pitcher plant gets most of it's nourishment from insects lured to nectar glands on the underside of the lids. Once onboard, the waxy sides of the pitcher ensure there's little chance of escape. Most slip to a watery grave. At the bottom of the pitcher glands secrete enzymes which help to digest the corpses, so feeding the plant. But not all visitors have a fatal attraction to the pitchers. The red crab spider spends it's entire life in the pitchers, hanging on with threads of silk. Instead of building a web, it relies on the water filled pitcher to trap it's food. When an ant falls in, the spider simply waits for it to drown and then abseils down for a spot of fishing. Alive, this ant would be far too dangerous for the spider to tackle so, using the pitchers as traps, means it can get bigger meals and the spider doesn't rob the pitcher of everything. The digested remains of it's booty will end up in the water providing instant food for the plant. Other food, like mosquito larvae, seems to be out of reach but the spider has another sup rising trick. By taking it's own air supply trapped in a bubble the crab spider can actually dive to the very bottom of the pitcher. Once the prey is captured, the spider hauls itself back up it's silken safety line. The pitcher is a one stop shop for this spider, but it's not alone. In the jungle there's competition for everything, even a small water filled pitcher plant. Such specialists create the jungle's remarkable diversity but finding enough food to survive is so challenging that most animals living here tend to be small though there are exceptions. This is the Congo in Africa. It's a vast wilderness and the least explored of all jungles. From up here the forest looks similar to the ones that grow in the Amazon or Southeast Asia. but down below there are some unexpected sights. Crisscrossing this forest, are countless miles of highways and they were made by something big. Forest elephants roam great distances in their search for food but to survive, they must emerge from the gloom of the forest. And clearings like this one, are a magnet for elephants from far and wide. These elephants live in much smaller groups than their savanna cousins. This might be the first time that one group will have seen another for a month. For the adult males it's a welcome break in an otherwise largely solitary existence and they're not the only animals attracted to the clearing. Forest buffaloes and red river hogs are also regular visitors as are bongos, which are very difficult to see outside these clearings. All these large forest animals have come here to collect an essential element of their diet that lies buried beneath the mud. And the elephant's trunk is the perfect tool for reaching it. To get what they seek the prospecting elephants must first blow away the covering layer of silt. Satisfaction at last. They're collecting a particular kind of clay that contains vital minerals scarce in their natural diet. It may be mud, but there's just nothing quite like it for enriching the blood. The clay also helps to absorb the toxins found in many leaves that the elephants eat. There are other benefits to coming here. These clearings are the only places where the forest elephants can get together in such numbers. When they return to the forest, they will have to go their separate ways, once more. If large animals are rare in jungles then groups of large animals actually living together, are even rarer. This posse of hunters is not only formidable, it's also very large. In their search for food chimpanzees move effortlessly between the forest floor and the canopy. They're one of the few jungle animals able to do so. Figs are a vital part of a chimpanzee's diet and some just can't seem to get enough of them. But there's something special about this stretch of forest in Uganda. Fruit is actually abundant and a lot of food supports lots of chimps. At a hundred and fifty strong, this community of chimps is the biggest yet found in Africa. Their numbers are so large, that they need a big territory, lots of fig trees and they're willing to fight for it. These calls announce the start of a raid into land controlled by their neighbors. As they leave their core zone, the patrol goes silent, occasionally stopping to listen. Signs of the enemy are detected and examined closely. The chimp militia are now at the very edge of their territory. All need to be on maximum alert. Then it's wait and listen. An unfamiliar chimp call raises the tension. It's an uncertain time. The size of the rival group is as yet unknown. Not far away the neighbors are feeding in a fig tree oblivious to the approaching dangers. The patrol moves off with a sense of purpose. They must remain silent until they close in on their rivals. The attack is on. To intimidate their opponents, the aggressors scream and drum on buttress roots. Several males corner an enemy female. It's a ferocious attack, and she's lucky to escape with her life. Others are not so fortunate. The battle won, a grizzly scene unfolds. An enemy youngster has been caught and killed. The carcass is shared between members of the group, and eaten. Killing a competitor makes sense if you want to protect your food supply but exactly why they cannibalize the dead chimp, is not fully understood. It may simply be a chance for some extra protein. Teamwork has brought this group of chimps great success but they'll soon reach the limits of their power. The competition for resources ensures that no one species dominates the jungle. The rainforest's great diversity has come at a cost. It has made them the most finely balanced ecosystems in the world only too easily upset and destroyed by that other great ape the chimpanzee's closest relative. Ourselves. Our planet's continents are fringed by shallow seas. Rarely more than two hundred meters deep they lie on the continental shelves which may stretch sometimes for hundreds of miles before the sea floor drops into deeper darker waters. All together they constitute a mere eight percent of the world's oceans but they contain the vast majority of it's marine life. A male humpback whale sings to attract a mate. The whales have just returned to their breeding grounds in the shallow seas of the tropics. The calf is no more than a few weeks old. Despite being three meters long and weighing nearly a ton he is nonetheless vulnerable. but his mother watches over him and, as he begins to tire, she supports him close to the surface so that he can breathe more easily. These shallows around the equator are excellent nurseries. They're warm, calm, and contain very few predators. The playful calf is now drinking five hundred liters of milk a day but his mother must starve. There is nothing for her to eat here. Like many tropical shallow seas these crystal clear waters are virtually lifeless. They receive year round sunlight but they lack the nutrients essential for the growth of plankton. The mother will be trapped here for the next five months until her calf is strong enough to make the journey to the feeding grounds, near the poles. Coral reefs are oases in a watery desert. Most tropical shallows are barren but these coral havens contain one quarter of all the marine life on our planet. Reefs are the work of polyps tiny colonial animals like minute sea anemones yet the great barrier reef is so big it can be seen from the Moon. It's actually two thousand separate reefs that together form a barrier stretching for over a thousand miles along Australia's northeastern coast. Despite it's vast size this reef does not contain the greatest variety of marine life on the planet. For that one must travel north to Indonesia. There are individual reefs in Indonesia that contain almost as many kinds of fish as live in the whole of the Caribbean. There are also ten times the number of coral species. Corals thrive in these waters with the help of microscopic plants, algae that grow within the tissues of the polyps and the polyps feed by snaring passing morsels with their tentacles. At night, the algae are inactive but then, the polyps put out even more tentacles so coral in effect feeds around the clock. This well balanced alliance brings benefits to both polyps and algae and between them, they turn the barren seas into rich gardens. The Indonesian reefs contain such a variety of life because they lie at a giant crossroads. This is the meeting place for different seas the Indian Ocean and the Pacific. Here everything demands a closer look. On the surface of this sea fan, there are two polyps that are not polyps. They're pygmy sea horses, the world's smallest, less than two centimeters high. They are males, settling a territorial dispute, by head butting. An electric flash?No, the display of a file clam. Perhaps this extraordinary pulsation of the clam's fleshy mantle is a warning to frighten away nibbling fish, but no one really knows. And there are snakes here, too, lots of them. These are banded sea crates. They lay their eggs on land but they hunt here in the water. They're too slow to catch fish in a straight chase so they seek prey that is hiding in the nooks and crannies of the coral. Their bite is highly venomous and paralyzes their victims. And on this reef the snakes do not hunt alone. Shoals of yellow goatfish and trivali are seeking similar prey. And they attract the snakes' attention. As one group of hunters searches the reef they're joined by the other. At least thirty snakes have now joined the caravan. The big fish scare the prey into cracks and there the snakes can catch them. And anything fleeing from the crates will swim straight into the mouths of the waiting trivali. There's nowhere to hide. As the raiders scour the reef, more and more snakes join the hunt. This cooperation between snakes and fish, spectacular though it is, has only recently been observed, for it only happens on the most remote reefs in Indonesia. Perhaps such hunting alliances were once a common sight but today no more than six percent of Indonesia's reefs are in their pristine state. Beyond the coral stretches a world of shifting sand. Out there with nowhere to hide survival is not easy and camouflage can be crucial. If this wasn't moving, you might think it was a shell or a rock. In fact it's an octopus. A gurnard. It's huge pectoral fins disguise it's shape and they can also help in clearing away sand when searching for food. The jawfish hides underground. The wonderpus octopus on the other hand has such a powerful bite that it has a special warning display to tell others to keep out of it's way. Here and there, plants manage to take root and they're cropped by green turtles. Seagrasses are the only flowering plants that have managed to grow in the sea although they put out a few ribbon like leaves they produce very extended networks of fleshy stems, risomes, that are buried in the sand. At their lushest they can transform the sea bed into an underwater meadow. The largest expanse grows in the shallow waters of Shark Bay, in Western Australia. These vast aquatic grasslands stretch for fifteen hundred square miles and, like terrestrial prairies, they support herds of grazers. Dugongs. Dugongs are the largest herbivores in the sea. They can be three meters long and weigh half a ton and they eat nothing but seagrass, mostly the fleshy risomes, which they excavate with their mobile lips. A herd can clear a patch of seagrass the size of a football pitch in a single day. Food is not evenly distributed in the tropical shallow seas and it can take a lot of finding but bottlenose dolphins are inquisitive, energetic,1 and very intelligent and they have discovered a shoal of baitfish. Together, they ride a wave, using it to carry them into the shallows and there, it will be easier to make the catch. In Western Australia these dolphins have taken on an ever tougher challenge. The fish have taken refuge close to the beach where the water is only a few centimeters deep. Tail slapping is a method dolphins often use to stun their prey but it doesn't seem to work here. The fish are tantalizingly close but they're still out of reach, so the dolphins try another technique. Vigorously pumping their tails, they work up some speed and then, they hydroplane. Their momentum carries them right through the shallowest waters, and onto the fish. Now they're in real danger of being stranded but fortune favors the brave. Younger dolphins lie alongside, watching but so far only eight individuals here have mastered this daring technique. Although most life in tropical waters is concentrated around the coral reefs and the seagrass meadows, there are some spectacular exceptions. The desert of Bahrain seems a very unlikely place to find a crowded bustling colony of seabirds. But every year, a hundred thousand socotra cormorants gather here to breed. It's swelteringly hot and only vigorous panting can prevent the birds from fatal overheating. This hardly seems a good place to rear young but at least, there are no land based predators here. The only source of trouble is likely to be the neighbors so each nest is built just beyond pecking reach. But what about food?There's only bare sand and the warm shallow sea beyond. Neither seem likely to produce enough nourishment to support bird life on this scale. The answer is blowing in the wind. Sand whipped up by Shamals offshore winds blows into the seas of the Arabian Gulf. With the grains come nutrients, which act as fertilizer and they transform the shallow sea into a rich fishing ground. So, paradoxically, it's the roasted sands of Arabia that prevent the gulf from being another desert in the sea. The whale calf is now five months old. He's almost doubled in size and his days in his tropical nursery are coming to an end. It has been a warm and safe place in which to grow up but there's nothing to eat here for his mother. She has been living off her fat reserves for the last eight months and she's close to starving. She must leave now, while she still has enough energy to guide and protect her calf, on the long voyage ahead. All across the tropics, humpbacks are heading away from the Equator towards the rich temperate seas of both the southern and the northern hemispheres. These are colder, rougher, and more dangerous waters. Mother and calf must stay close. They can send sound signals to one another, above the roar of the ocean by slapping fins on the surface. In winter, the temperate seas are lashed by violent storms. The turbulence stirs the water, and draws nutrients up from the depths but nutrients alone can not support life. There must also be sunlight. In the spring, as the sun daily climbs higher in the sky the algae start to grow. Blooms the size of the Amazon Rainforest turn the seas green. Individually the algae are tiny but together, they produce three quarters of all the oxygen in our atmosphere. They're eaten by an array of bewildering creatures. Salps appear in the plankton soup. Individuals link together to form chains which can stretch for fifteen meters. Pumping water through their bodies they strain out algae and other edible particles. Comb jellies cruise through the water. They too flourish in this seasonal soup and for short periods, they appear in astounding numbers. Krill, shrimp like creatures. By weight they're the most abundant animals on the planet. A single swarm can contain two million tons of them and that is a lot of fish food. The shallow temperate seas support the greatest concentrations of fish on our planet. Huge shoals migrate from their overwintering grounds in the depths to feed in these rich waters. It's these shoals that support most of the world's sea mammals. Sea lions have all the agility and speed needed to collect what they want and seemingly delight in doing so. Dusky dolphin, often in pods two hundred strong work together to reap the harvest. They break up the shoals into smaller, more manageable balls, and all the hunters benefit. By midsummer, the surface nutrients have all been absorbed. The algae die and the food chain collapses. In a few special places, however the temperate seas sustain these levels of life throughout the summer. Along the coast of California, ocean currents carry a constant supply of nutrients up from the depths to the surface layers. These upwellings fertilize forests of giant kelp, that thrive in the summer sunshine. The algal towers are as high as a three story house and they can grow by half a meter a day. Life in the kelp is as full of drama, as in any other forest but the cast is less familiar. An army of sea urchins is mounting an attack. The urchin plague strikes at the kelp's holdfasts their crucial attachments to the rock. Holdfasts are extremely tough, but each urchin has five teeth, which are self sharpening and are replaced every few months. Urchins fell vast areas of kelp forest creating clearings know as urchin barrens yet barrens is a poor description. Millions of invertebrates invade the seabed. The most fearsome predator here is a giant. The sunflower starfish is a meter across, with an appetite for brittle stars. It uses it's feet to taste for prey. When it's actions are speeded up, it becomes clear that the predator's fondness for the brittle stars is almost matched by the brittle stars ability to get out of the way. Sand dollars flat sea urchins cluster together as a defense. But it doesn't seem to work against the sunflower starfish. The predator extrudes it's stomach, and wraps it around it's victims liquefying their soft parts. Nothing is left of them, except their white skeletons. The Californian upwellings are seasonal and relatively small but in Southern Africa they're so big they create seas rich enough to support colonies of over a million seals. The Benguela Current sweeps along the western coastline of Southern Africa driving nutrient rich waters up to the surface and then, at the southern tip of Africa it meets the Agulhas Current, arriving from the east. The result. Even richer waters. The seals here thrive on a diet of fish and squid. In temperate seas there may actually be more squid than fish. These are chokker squid, and they lay their egg capsules in sandy shallows bathed by the warmer. Agulhas Current. Each capsule contains a hundred tiny squid. Within a few days they develop spots of pigment which, when they're adult, they will use to communicate with one another. With females continuing to lay eggs and males still preoccupied with repelling rivals, the squid drop their guard. Stingray. Short tailed stingray can be up to two meters across. They're the largest of all the stingrays, and they have appetites to match. Another predator is on the prowl. The aptly named ragged tooth shark. Raggies grow to three meters long, but they share these waters with a shark twice their size. The great white. The largest predatory fish on the planet. Each dawn cape fur seals leave their colony to go fishing. To reach the open sea, they must cross a narrow strip of water and that is patrolled by great whites. Each seal is indeed swimming for it's life. The shark relies on surprise. The great white's turn of speed is powered by a high metabolism. They only thrive in cold temperate seas for only these waters contain sufficient food necessary to fuel such a ravenous predator. As you travel towards the poles north or south the colder, stormier seas can become even richer. Midway between South Africa and the South Pole lies the isolated island of Marion. The island sits in the infamous "roaring forties" where incessant gale force winds draw nutrients up from the depths ensuring plenty of food for king penguins. The kings are returning from a three day fishing trip, with food for their chicks. But first they must cross a crowded beach, threading their way between gigantic and bad tempered elephant seals. The two hundred thousand penguins breeding here are testament to the richness of the fishing. King chicks are dependent on their mothers for over a year and this puts a great deal of pressure on the parents. Being flightless, the returning penguins must cross the open beach on foot. Fur seals, that have come to the beach to breed, are waiting for them. Fur seals normally live on krill but these have now acquired an unexpected taste for blubber rich penguins. Penguins may be featherweights by comparison but they have razor sharp bills and a feisty character. The seal could easily lose an eye. The only safe way to grab a penguin is from behind, and the birds are well aware of that. Both animals are clumsy on this terrain but the penguin has the more to lose. Made it. Two out of three penguins survive the seal attacks and succeed in reaching their ever hungry chicks. The humpbacks are nearing the end of their epic journeys. After two months and thousands of miles, they're entering the polar seas both in the north and the south. In the far north, winter is over at last and the ice is starting to melt. The Aleutian Island chain running west from Alaska is the gateway to the Bearing Sea. With the retreating ice, rough weather and ferocious currents stir up these shallow seas. Add sunshine and the mix is spectacularly productive. Five million shearwaters have flown almost ten thousand miles from Australia to get here. In all eighty million seabirds come here for the summer the greatest concentration to be found anywhere on Earth. The humpbacks have finally arrived. The giant shearwater flocks hunt the krill swarms sometimes diving to depths of forty meters to reach them. A large humpback eats three tons of krill a day. The polar seas in summer are the most productive on the planet and the whales gorge themselves round the clock. The fat reserves they lay down now will keep them alive during the year to come but it may not always be this way. Fish and krill stocks are declining so rapidly that spectacles like this may soon be part of history. Once the mother and calf have reached their feeding grounds, they will separate. With luck, the calf will make the epic journey across the oceans from equator to pole another seventy times cruising back and forth between the shallow seas where life proliferates so abundantly on our planet. Trees. Surely among the most magnificent of all living things. Some are the largest organisms on Earth dwarfing all others, and these are the tallest of them all. The deciduous and coniferous woodlands that grow in the seasonal parts of our planet are the most extensive forests on Earth. Their sheer extent stuns the imagination. The barren snows of the Arctic. A thousand miles from the North Pole, and heading south. This is the very first place that trees can grow. To begin with the conifers are sparse but soon they dominate the land. This is the Taiga Forest. There are as many trees here, as in all the world's rainforests combined. The Taiga circles the globe and contains a third of all the trees on Earth. It produces so much oxygen, that it refreshes the atmosphere of the entire planet. At the Taiga's northern extent the growing season can last for just one month a year. It can take fifty years for a tree to get bigger than a seedling. It's a silent world where little stirs. But there are occasional signs of life. Stories written in the snow. The prints of an Arctic fox and the hare it might've been stalking. A female polar bear and her two cubs. Some animals are so difficult to glimpse that they're like spirits. One could live a lifetime in these woods and never see a lynx. The cat must roam hundreds of miles in search of prey and may never visit the same patch of forest twice. It's the very essence of wilderness. With so few prey animals here, life for a hunter is particularly hard. Creatures are scarce because few can eat conifer needles. The moose is an exception. Growth is so difficult that conifers protect their precious leaves by filling them with resin. That reduces water loss, but it also makes them very distasteful. At least the conifer's seeds are edible but they're protected within armor plated cones and it takes a specialist to reach them. The crossbill's extraordinary beak can prise apart the scales, so that it's tongue can extract the seeds. Birds are fortunate. When the seasonal crop is gathered, they can fly south. But one animal is so expert at survival in this frozen forest that it stays here and is active all year long. In local folklore, the wolverine is a link to the spirit world and a cross between a bear and a wolf. In reality, it's a huge weasel. It's bulk helps to conserve body heat and also broadens it's menu. It's so big and powerful, it can even bring down an adult caribou. For it's size, it's said that the animal can eat more in one sitting than any other which is why it's also known as the glutton. Being gluttonous here is a very effective strategy. It's wise to eat all you can, when you can and when even a glutton can't eat more it stores what's left for later, in the surrounding deep freeze. Spring in the ice forest. The capercaillie can also digest conifer needles but feeding is not it's priority at the moment. Like gladiators, the males square up for a battle. Each may have just a single chance to impress a female. Neither can afford a lapse in concentration. The injured loser may not survive. The inhabitants of this great wilderness may live and die without ever having contact with humanity. Long may it be that way. The northern forest may be the largest on Earth but to see coniferous trees that have reached their full potential you must travel a thousand miles south of here. The Pacific Coast of North America. The land of hemlock, douglas fir and giant redwood. Here, water is never locked up in ice and even if rains fail the needles can extract moisture from the fogs that roll in from the sea. The Sun's energy powers these forests not for one month as it does in the Taiga but for half the year. These conifers grow at ten times the rate of those near the Arctic and they live for thousands of years. One grove of redwoods in California contains three of the tallest trees on Earth. This one is over a hundred meters high, the size of a thirty story building. These forests were growing here long before humans walked the Earth. They were in their prime twenty million years ago and existed before the Swiss Alps or the Rocky Mountains were even raised. There is more living matter in a forest of giant conifers, than in any tropical rainforest but it's all contained within the trees. These are as inedible as those in the Taiga so animals are still scarce, but they are present. A pine marten. It's spring, the best time of year for a marten to find food. Bird's eggs are a seasonal snack and for a short time, there's plenty of them. Sometimes perhaps, too many. But to live here permanently, the marten needs a more reliable food source. Squirrels fit the bill. They thrive here on the pine cones and although these are also seasonal they can be stored and eaten throughout the year. The squirrels are busy mating. Good news for the hunter. A distracted squirrel, is a vulnerable squirrel. But, this time, the amorous couple is safe. There is a loner stocking his larder, who will be the easier target. Early summer, and great grey owl chicks are fledging. Adults can only raise young here in years when the seasonal vole crop is big enough to support them. The moment has arrived for their first flight. Leaping from the world's tallest trees is not for the faint hearted. If you're going to fall here it's quite a good idea to do it in stages. The ground is no place for an owl. If he's to climb to the top of his class he'll need to persevere. So now, let's have another go. The American conifer forests may not be the richest in animal life but their trees are extraordinary. This giant sequoia, a relative of the redwood, is the largest living thing on Earth. Known as General Sherman, it's the weight of ten blue whales. Higher up in the nearby mountains, bristlecone pines, the oldest organisms on the planet. Some have been here for five thousand years. They were alive before the pyramids were built and were already three thousand years old when Christ was born. Across the Equator, in the southern hemisphere there are forests that mirror those of the north. Here in South America araucaria trees or monkey puzzles are like the conifers of the Taiga. They have waterproof scales, instead of needles and their cones look a little different but the principles are the same. Slender billed parakeets rather than crossbills, extract their seeds. Where the growing season is longerm, there are alerce trees the redwoods of the south. As in the frozen north, the Valdivian forests of Chile support very few animals but that is the end of the similarity. This is a bizarre world of miniature creatures. The pudu, the world's smallest deer feeds on the giant leaves of the gunnera plant. The female is just thirty centimeters high at the shoulder and her infants are hardly bigger than kittens. The male must stay alert. There are hunters here who would snatch his young. Another miniature. The kodkod cat. It's the smallest cat in all the Americas and a young pudu would be a feast for it. But, with the male on guard, the kodkod must lower his sights. Moths are hatching. They're the last of the summer. The tiny cat should be able to score with these. No one knows why the creatures here are so small but at least they can survive on meager rations. You might call this a game of cat and moth. As winter approaches in Chile spring is arriving in the northern hemisphere. These are the deciduous forests of Homme. Dormant throughout the winter, they now undergo one of the most magical transformations in the natural world. By late spring the landscape is wrapped in a vibrant fresh green. Here, instead of conifers, there are broad leaved trees and that makes the character of this forest entirely different. Being broad, these leaves trap much more light than needles but they're also thin, soft and edible. And others can eat the leaf eaters. It's spring in the great broad leaved forests of Eastern Europe and Asiatic Russia. The mandarin ducks are courting. The female mandarin nests in a tree hole and when it's time for everyone to leave she leads the way. The ducklings are only twenty four hours old. It's a long drop, and a few calls of encouragement are required. Two down seven to go. There are still two missing. All present and correct. But they won't be safe until they reach water and the forest pool is almost a mile away. By June the days are at their longest and all across the northern hemisphere the broad leaves are hard at work. On the east coast of North America it seems like any other summer's evening but tonight is special. After seventeen years underground creatures are stirring. The nymphs of the periodical cicada have been biding their time. Now they march like zombies towards the nearest tree, and start to climb. At first, there are merely thousands but soon, more than a billion swarm all over the forest. The biggest insect emergence on the planet is underway. They invade the upper branches, where they climb out of their external skeletons and assume their adult winged form. At first they're white and soft, but they have until dawn to complete their transformation. After an absence of seventeen years, the forest is now overrun by cicadas. The adults are clumsy and very edible. For turtles and other inhabitants of the forest this is a feast they're lucky to see once in their lifetime and they gorge themselves while they can. Times have never been so good. The cicadas have no defenses and virtually offer themselves to their attackers. The stream of insects is so relentless that soon all the predators are full to the point of bursting and still the cicadas come. With the predators overwhelmed the survivors can achieve their purpose. After mating, the adults lay their eggs and then their job is done. In just a few days they will all die and the forest will fall silent. The cicadas here, will not be heard again for another seventeen years. Having fed the predators, the cicadas leave one final gift for the forest itself. The nutrients in a generation of cicadas are returned to the soil, all at once and the trees enjoy a marked spurt in growth. This may be the single largest dose of fertilizer in the natural world. In the great broad leaf forests of Eastern Europe the days are beginning to shorten, and a primeval sound heralds the onset of autumn. Male red deer are starting their rut. The air is heavy with the scent of females. The rules are simple. Winner takes all. Across the northern hemisphere the deciduous forests are changing. Leaves that have provided food and shelter since the spring, are now shed. In the broad leaf forests of Russia winter is particularly severe but there will always be some who benefit from hardship. Black vultures scavenge from the carcass of a seeker deer that has died of cold or starvation. These endangered birds are visitors. They've come down from the north to escape the even colder conditions in Siberia. An Amur leopard. The rarest cat on Earth. Winter is a difficult time for this hunter. There are no leaves for cover and no young prey animals. This female has the added pressure, of having to provide for her one year old cub. It'll be another twelve months, before he'll be able to fend for himself. The bickering vultures have abandoned the carcass. It's a valuable discovery for the leopards. But the cub doesn't share it's mother's sense of urgency. The vultures have left behind plenty of good meat but it's stiff with frost. The mother works to open the hide, and make feeding a little easier for her cub. There are only forty Amur leopards left in the wild and that number is still falling. The harshness of the winter here hinders their increasing numbers. It takes one of these females longer to raise her young to independence than it does a leopard in Africa. If the mother can sustain her cub for a few more weeks spring will bring an increase in prey and her task will lighten. For all the inhabitants of this seasonal forest the long, cold wait is nearly over. Spring in a deciduous woodland is special. With no leaves overhead, the rays of the sun strike the forest floor directly and their warmth rouses plants from their winter sleep. The ground living plants are in a hurry. Before long the trees above will come into leaf and steal their light. Their flowers decorate the forest floor as they advertise their sweet nectar to the newly emerged insects. The spring blooms of the deciduous woodlands have no equivalent in either the great conifer forests, or the tropical jungles. Within a matter of weeks the canopy has closed and only a few wheeling shafts of light penetrate the woodland. In the treetops, the broad leaves rapidly expand to their full size to make the most of summer while it lasts. Then, after a few months, the days begin to shorten again and the trees must shut down and shed their leaves in preparation for the cold dark time ahead. Great tracts of North America flush red as the season progresses. The effect is so spectacular and so extensive that it can be seen from space. The threat of winter frost is not the only reason for trees to shed leaves. These forests stand in the tropics. Here day length never changes but the dry season is so severe that the trees can't afford to loose the amount of water that would evaporate from their broad leaves, so the leaves must be shed. The forest resembles a European woodland in mid winter but the heat is overpowering, and it's inhabitants, unfamiliar. For the creatures of India's teak forests, these are desperate times but salvation is at hand. The mahwa tree is about to bloom. It's flowers are full of liquid making them irresistible. The mahwa is an oasis in a hot dry desert. Those that fly or climb are not the only ones to get a share. Chital deer follow the langur monkeys collecting the flowers that fall. The monkeys welcome the deer, for deer are unrivaled at spotting predators. If they are relaxed, it must be safe to come down to the ground and gather the food that lies there but it's not wise to travel far from the sentinels. Tropical Madagascar. The wet season. It's now that the baobab trees regrow their leaves and collect water to store in their huge trunks, ready for the dry season ahead. The prehistoric shape of these trees is rightly famous but few have ever witnessed the baobab's real magic for that happens at night and high in the treetops. Flush with water, the baobab prepares itself for an unforgettable display. Once started the foot long flowers can open fully in less than a minute. As the flowers open, the creatures of the forest wake. The mouse lemurs have been hibernating throughout the dry season. With the return of rains it's time to get busy. A dozen share this tree hole, but there's plenty of room. The world's smallest primate is no bigger than your hand. High in the branches above, the baobab's nectar is starting to flow. A drink of this sugary energy packed liquid is an ideal way for the lemurs to start their day. Liquid oozes from the flower's center and trickles down the petals. But the nectar is not intended for lemurs. These giant hawk moths are the drinkers the tree needs to attract. As they sip, moving from tree to tree, so they transfer pollen and fertilize the flowers. Nectar was an excellent first course for the lemurs but moths are the main dish. The moths are very important to the lemurs for they will replenish the fat reserves that the lemurs need to survive the barren dry season. The lemurs might seem to be a pest for the baobab. They kill it's pollinators and rob it of it's nectar but they do give something in return. For, as the wrestle with the moths, their fur inevitably becomes dusted with pollen so they, too, become pollinators. As the alternation of wet and dry seasons brings change to some tropical forests so the progression of summer to winter dictates life in more temperate regions. Whether trees have needles or broad leaves it is their ability to survive annual change, that has enabled them to cover such vast areas of the Earth and made the seasonal forests the greatest forests of all.  Away from all land the ocean. It covers more than half the surface of our planet and yet for the most part it is beyond our reach. Much of it is virtually empty a watery desert. All life that is here is locked in a constant search to find food a struggle to conserve precious energy in the open ocean. The biggest of all fish thirty tons in weight, twelve meters long a whale shark. It's huge bulk is sustained by mere microscopic creatures of the sea Plankton. Whale sharks cruise on regular habitual routes between the best feeding grounds. In February, that takes them to the surface waters far from the coast of Venezuela. Others are already here. Baitfish have come for the same reason to feed on the plankton. The whale shark has timed it's arrival exactly right. Oddly, the tiny fish swarm around it. They're using it as a shield. Other predatory fish are lurking nearby. Yellowfin tuna. They seem wary of the giant. The shark dives, as if to escape from such overcrowding. Now the tuna have a chance to attack the unprotected baitfish but then back comes the giant. It has taken a vast mouthful of the baitfish itself. Plankton, it seems, is not the only food for a whale shark. Both shark and tuna feast together but the tuna must be wary. Even they can end up in the whale shark's stomach. Predators here must grab what they can, when they can for such events do not last long. The dense shoals, on which so many depend gather only when water conditions are perfect. Many predators spend much of their time cruising the open ocean endlessly searching. Plankton feeding rays do so, gliding with minimum effort. The oceanic whitetip shark another energy efficient traveler. It specializes in locating prey in the emptiest areas of the open ocean patrolling the top one hundred meters of water. Taste in water, is the equivalent of smell in the air. An oceanic whitetip is able to detect even the faintest trace. Small pilot fish swim with it. The shark can find prey far more easily than they can and they'll be able to collect the scraps from it's meals. It's long, fixed pectoral fins enable it to soar through the water, with the least expenditure of energy. This shark has found a school of rainbow runners. It would eat one, given the chance but rainbow runners are swift and agile and not easily caught so, it bides it's time. There's a chance that, eventually, it may spot a weakened fish that's catchable. The hunter endlessly waiting. Excitement far from land. A school of dolphin five hundred strong. They've sensed there's food around, and they're racing to catch up with it. The news has spread. Now a number of schools are on their way. They're heading towards the Azores volcanic islands a thousand miles west of Portugal. The dolphin scan the water ahead with their sonar. They're close to their target. This is it. Scad mackerel. It's difficult for a single dolphin to catch the fish. To avoid wasting energy the work as a group. They drive the fish upwards, trapping them against the surface and there, other predators await them. Cory's shearwaters. They're waiting for the dolphin to drive the prey closer to the surface. Now the shearwaters can dive down on them, descending to twenty meters or more and the dolphins block the baitball's retreat. The dolphins leave as soon as they've had their fill and, at last, the mackerel sink below the diving range of the birds. As the Sun disappears, a profound change takes place in the ocean. Deep water plankton start to rise from the depths and another hungry army prepares to receive it. Every night, wherever conditions are right, countless millions of creatures from the deep migrate to the surface, seeking food. A baby sailfish, fifteen centimeters long snaps up everything in it's path. In three years' time, it'll be one of the oceans most formidable hunters weighing sixty kilos. Just now, however, it's very vulnerable. These manta rays are giants. Eight meters across and weighing over two tons. The blade-like projections on either side of the head help to steer plankton into the manta's mouth. Dawn returns, and the plankton sinks back into the depths. If we are to follow, we must use a submarine. As we descend into the darkness, the pressure builds, the temperature falls. Below five hundred meters, new, mysterious animals appear. Their bizarre shapes help them to remain suspended in the dark space. Some resemble creatures familiar from shallower waters others defy classification. All around, organic particles drift downwards. Marine snow, detritus from the creatures swarming in the sunlit waters above. The snow is food for many animals here, like the sea spider a small relative of shrimps and crabs. Those strange leg-like appendages are feathered, to stop it from sinking. They can also enmesh marine snow which it wipes carefully into it's jaws. A sawtooth eel hangs upright and motionless. Gazing ever upwards, it watches for prey, silhouetted against the faint glimmerings of light from the surface. Days may pass before prey swims close enough for it to strike. Farther down still, the blackness is complete. No vestige of sunlight can penetrate as far as this. Food is very scarce and nothing can afford to waste any energy. A dumbo octopus simply flaps a fin no need for the jet propulsion used by it's shallow water relatives above. The weirdest, in this world of the strange, vampyroteuthis the vampire squid from hell. Disturb it and it only retreats a little distance. Go after it, and it has a special defense. To see what it does, you must switch off the lights. The vampire squid has lights of it's own. Bioluminescent bacteria shine from pockets on it's arms to confuse it's predators. Are those eyes? In fact they're spots at the end of it's mantle. A bite there, would leave the head unscathed. The threat diminishes, and vampyroteuthis disappears into the blackness. At last, the sea floor. Over two miles down, the pressure here is three hundred times that at the surface. It takes several months for marine snow to drift down as far as this. As you travel away from the rocky margins of the continents an immense plain stretches ahead. It extends for thousands of miles gradually sinking downwards. There are faint trails in the ooze, signs that even here there is life. These are what made some of them sea urchins sifting the accumulating drifts. Shrimps standing on elegant tiptoe fastidiously select the particles that appeal to them but, in the deep sea, as everywhere else if there are grazers, there are hunters. A monkfish, almost indistinguishable from the sand on which it lies. Why waste energy chasing around, if you can attract prey towards you with a lure? Maybe that one was a bit big. The monkfish can wait, for days if necessary, until the right sized meal turns up. Scavengers on the other hand, have to move around to find their food. Crabs can detect the faintest of tastes in the water and that helps them locate the latest body to drift down from above. Eels are already feeding on the corpse. Isopods, like giant marine woodlice a third of a meter long are ripping into the rotting flesh. Over the next few hours there'll be frenzied competition between scavengers of all kinds to grab a share. Just occasionally, there is a gigantic bonanza. The remains of a sperm whale. It died five months or so ago. There's little left but fatty blubber clinging to it's bones. It's flesh has nourished life for miles around but now the feast is almost over. Spider crabs, a meter across, still pick at the last putrid remains. A few weeks more, and nothing will be left, but bare bones. The crabs will have to fast, until the next carcass drifts down. But not all food comes from the sunlit world above. The floor of the Atlantic Ocean is split in two by an immense volcanic mountain chain that winds unbroken for forty five thousand miles around the globe. In places, it's riven by great fissures, from which superheated water loaded with dissolved minerals blasts into the icy depths. Clouds of sulfides solidify into towering chimneys, as tall as a three story house. At four hundred degrees this scalding cocktail of chemicals would be lethally toxic to most forms of life but astoundingly, a particular kind of bacteria thrives here and feeding on the bacteria, vast numbers of shrimps. So, beyond the farthest reach of the Sun's power a rich independent community exists, that draws all it's energy directly from the Earth's molten core. On the other side of the planet, in the western Pacific bordering Japan the dragon chimneys, another series of hot vents, erupting in the darkness. Here, more, but different bacteria thrive in a similar way. And here, too, more crustaceans, but quite different species from those around the hot vents in the Atlantic. These are squat lobsters, clad in furry armor jostling with one another beside the jets of superheated water for the best places, from which to graze on bacteria. These vents, too, like those in the Atlantic are isolated oases so widely separated, that each community is unique. Cross to the other side of the Pacific, to the deep near the Galapagos Islands and there are yet other fissures venting superheated water. One and a half miles down, at a site known as Nine North towering chimneys support a spectacular display of giant tubeworms. These vents give off so much energy that some of the worms reach three meters in length. They're the fastest growing marine invertebrates known. All told, over fifty different species have so far been found living here. The inhabitants of these bustling communities may grow at speed but their existence can also be short, for the vents do not erupt indefinitely. Suddenly, unpredictably, they may become inactive. Nine months have passed at Nine North. What were only recently chimneys teeming with life have turned into cold, sterile mineral monuments. Some eddy, deep in the Earth's crust diverted the volcanic energy elsewhere and, an entire microworld was extinguished. In places, volcanoes have erupted to build great submarine mountains. There are thought to be around thirty thousand such volcanoes some, measured from the sea floor, are taller than Everest. Sheer cliffs soaring to drowned volcanic peaks. Powerful currents sweep up the mountains' flanks transporting nutrients from deep water towards the summits. The hard rock provides excellent anchorage for communities of great variety and stunning color. Soft corals, several meters across collect the marine snow as it drifts past. Whip corals stretch out into the current. Giant sponges filter nourishment from the cold water. A richly varied community flourishes here sustained by the nutrients and detritus in the icy currents that flow around the peak. Yet it is all blossoming on an extinct volcano a mile below the reach of the Sun. A nautilus. It spends it's days hiding four hundred meters down But as night falls, it ascends up to the reefs, to look for food. It's graceful shell contains gas filled floatation chambers, that control it's depth. It's powered by a jet of water, squirting from a siphon but it travels shell first, so it can't see exactly where it's going. It's nearest living relatives are squid and octopus which, over evolutionary time, have both lost their shells and the octopus has become one of the nautilus' major predators. It's a master of disguise. The nautilus keeps well clear of them. It's small tentacles carry highly developed chemical sensors which can detect traces of both predators and prey. It uses it's water jet to dig in the sand. Because it devotes so little energy to swimming, it only needs a meal once a month. Got something. And just as well. Dawn is approaching and it has to puff it's way back, to deeper waters. Thirty miles away, shoals of squid are jetting upwards towards the surface. By night, they seek small fish among the plankton, but they're cautious. Pacific spotted dolphin. They're guided by their sonar. The dolphin, as so often, are working as a team, synchronizing their attacks to confuse their prey. As dawn approaches, squid and fish and plankton retreat downwards, to shelter in the darkness. Some of these isolated volcanoes rise as much as nine thousand meters from the sea floor, reaching close to the surface. Around these peaks invigorated by daily sunshine marine life flourishes in spectacular abundance. Fish crowd here, because the volcano forces nutrients to the surface encouraging the plankton to bloom. An oceanic wanderer, a mola mola stops by to be cleaned by reef fish, at the sea mount edge. Butterfly-fish pluck string-like parasites from it's flanks. The huge fish lives on jellyfish over a thousand meters down where the water is twenty degrees colder so, a brushup near the surface, allows it to warm up before making more deep water forays. The summit of this volcanic mountain rises above the surface of the sea. It's Ascension Island eight hundred miles from any other land, a welcome vital haven for long distance travelers. Frigatebirds spend months continuously airborne at sea but at nesting time, they come to Ascension from all over the ocean. The island's barren slopes of volcanic ash and lava might seem to offer perfectly good sites for a nest but the frigates choose an even more isolated site Boatswain Bird Island, a lonely pillar, just of Ascension's coast. Frigates are the world's lightest bird, relative to their wingspan and they can soar for weeks on end with minimal effort. They seem much more at home in the skies, than in a crowded colony on land but nest, they must. They come from all over the Atlantic to this, their only colony. There are boobys here, too. To raise their young, seabirds worldwide seek such remote islands. Swimmers also come to Ascension to breed. A female green turtle approaches the coast. She's not eaten once, in two months. She may have traveled one thousand miles from her feeding grounds the greatest journey of her kind. Many others are here, too, resting on the sandy sea floor awaiting the darkness of night, when it'll be safer to visit the beaches. Eggs that were laid a few weeks ago, at the start of the season are beginning to hatch. Most hatchings happen at night. Now, in the light of day, the young are extremely vulnerable. They must get to the sea as soon as possible but their trials have only just begun. Many will drown in the pounding waves. During the next twenty years, the vast majority will inevitably die but those that survive will, eventually, as their mothers did before them, return to the very same beach where they were hatched. How they find their way back across thousands of miles of open ocean, we still have no idea. A frigate soars. Somewhere, beneath the surface below, there is the food it must have. But where? Those that fly above the ocean must be able to read the signs of fresh supplies, or perish. A hundred miles from the Mexican coast, and keen eyes have spotted movement. Sailfish, three meters long, are closing in on prey. They will only use just enough energy to make their kill never wasting a fin stroke. Nearly a hundred sailfish have surrounded a single school of baitfish. It's very rare to see so many of these hunters in one place. To herd their prey, the predators raise their huge dorsal fins. A mistimed strike by one sailfish, could fatally damage another but each continually changes it's color, from blue, to striped, to black that warns it's companions of it's intentions and also confuses the prey. As the shoal is driven nearer the surface, it comes within the range of the seabirds. Out here, in the open ocean, there is nowhere for the baitfish to hide. Sailfish live a high octane life. To survive, they must find prey daily so their entire existence will be spent on the move. Over ninety percent on the living space for life on our planet, is in the oceans Home to the biggest animal that exists or has ever existed. the blue whale. Some weigh nearly two hundred tons twice the size of the largest dinosaur. Despite their great size, we still have little idea of where they travel in the vast oceans and none at all of where they go to breed. The largest animal on Earth feeds almost exclusively on one of the smallest krill, shrimp-like crustaceans. They take many tons of water into their ballooning throats in a single gulp and sieve out what it contains. Every day, each one swallows some four million krill. Such gargantuan harvests depend on the continuing fertility of the oceans But global changes now threaten the great blooms of plankton on which the whales depend. Once and not so long ago three hundred thousand blue whales roamed the oceans now, less than three percent of that number remains. Our planet is still full of wonders. As we explore them, so we gain not only understanding, but power. It's not just the future of the whale that today lies in our hands it's the survival of the natural world in all parts of the living planet. We can now destroy, or we can cherish. The choice is ours.